VI  INTRODUCTORY 


It  was  with  something  almost  like  dread  that  I 
approached  the  task  of  arranging  these  letters,  lest 
the  deep  revelations  of  a  peculiarly  shy  inner  life 
might  so  pervade  them  that  in  true  loyalty  to  their 
writer  none  could  be  publicly  used.  .  But  with  few 
exceptions  they  have  been  read  and  prepared  with 
entire  relief  from  that  feeling,  and  with  unshrinking 
pleasure  ;  the  sanctities  were  not  invaded.  Emily 
kept  her  little  reserves,  and  bared  her  soul  but  seldom, 
even  in  intimate  correspondence.  It  was  not  so 
much  that  she  was  always  on  spiritual  guard,  as  that 
she  sported  with  her  varying  moods,  and  tested  them 
upon  her  friends  with  apparent  delight  in  the  effect, 
as  airy  and  playful  as  it  was  half  unconscious. 

So  large  is  the  number  of  letters  to  each  of 
several  correspondents,  that  it  has  seemed  best  to 
place  these  sets  in  separate  chapters.  The  conti- 
nuity is  perhaps  more  perfectly  preserved  in  this  way 
than  by  the  usual  method  of  mere  chronological 
succession;  especially  as,  in  a  life  singularly  un- 
eventful, no  marked  periods  of  travel  or  achieve- 
ment serve  otherwise  to  classify  them.  On  this  plan 
a  certain  order  has  been  possible,  too ;  the  opening 
letters  in  each  chapter  are  always  later  than  the  first 
of  the  preceding,  although  the  last  letters  of  one 
reach  a  date  beyond  the  beginning  of  the  next. 
The  less  remarkable  writing,  of  course,  fills  the  first 
chapters ;  but  even  this  shows  her  love  of  study,  of 
Nature,  and  a  devotion  to  home  almost  as  intense 
as  in  strange  Emily  Bronte. 


INTRODUCTORY  VU 


Nothing  is  perhaps  more  marked  than  the  change 
of  style  between  the  difiiiseness  of  girlhood  and  the 
brilliant  sententiousness  of  late  middle  hfe,  often 
startlingly  imexpected.  And  yet  suggestions  of  fu- 
ture picturesque  and  epigrammatic  power  occasion- 
ally flash  through  the  long,  youthfiil  correspondence. 
Lowell  once  wrote  of  the  first  letters  of  Carlyle, 
'The  man  ...  is  all  there  in  the  earliest  of  his 
writing  that  we  have  (potentially  there,  in  character 
wholly  there).'  It  is  chiefly  for  these  'potential* 
promises  that  Emily  Dickinson's  girlish  letters  are 
included,  all  the  variations  in  the  evolution  of  a 
style  having  hardly  less  interest  for  the  student  of 
human  nature  than  of  literature.  Village  life,  even 
in  a  college  town,  was  very  democratic  in  the  early 
dajrs  when  the  first  of  these  letters  were  written, 
and  they  suggest  a  refreshing  atmosphere  of  homely 
simplicity. 

Unusual  difliculties  have  been  encountered  in  ar- 
ranging the  letters  with  definite  reference  to  years, 
as  none  but  the  very  earliest  were  dated.  The 
change  in  handwriting,  of  which  specimens  are  given 
in  facsimile,  was  no  less  noticeable  than  Emily 
Dickinson's  development  in  literary  style ;  and  this 
alone  has  been  a  general  guide.  The  thoughtfiilness 
of  a  few  correspondents  in  recording  the  time  of 
the  letters'  reception  has  been  a  farther  and  most 
welcome  assistance ;  while  occasionally  the  kind  of 
postage-stamp  and  the  postmark  helped  to  indicate 
when  they  were  written,  although  generally  the  enve- 


Vlll  INTRODUCTORY 


lopes  had  not  been  preserved.  But  the  larger  part 
have  been  placed  by  searching  out  the  dates  of 
contemporaneous  incidents  mentioned,  —  for  in- 
stance, numerous  births,  marriages,  and  deaths; 
any  epoch  in  the  life  of  a  friend  was  an  event  to 
Emily  Dickinson,  always  noticed  by  a  bit  of  flashing 
verse,  or  a  graceful,  if  mystically  expressed,  note  of 
comfort  or  congratulation.  If  errors  are  found  in 
assignment  to  the  proper  time,  it  will  not  be  from 
lack  of  having  interrogated  all  available  sources  of 
information. 

In  more  recent  years,  dashes  instead  of  punctua- 
tion, and  capitals  for  all  important  words,  together 
with  the  quaint  handwriting,  give  to  the  actual 
manuscript  an  individual  fascination  quite  irre- 
sistible. But  the  coldness  of  print  destroys  that 
elusive  charm,  so  that  dashes  and  capitals  have  been 
restored  to  their  conventional  use. 

In  her  later  years,  Emily  Dickinson  rarely  ad- 
dressed the  envelopes  :  it  seemed  as  if  her  sensitive 
nature  shrank  from  the  publicity  which  even  her 
handwriting  would  undergo,  in  the  observation  of 
indifferent  eyes.  Various  expedients  were  resorted 
to,  —  obliging  friends  frequently  performed  this  office 
for  her;  sometimes  a  printed  newspaper  label  was 
pasted  upon  the  envelope ;  but  the  actual  strokes 
of  her  own  pencil  were,  so  far  as  possible,  reserved 
exclusively  for  friendly  eyes. 

Emily  Dickinson's  great  disinclination  for  an  ex- 
position of  the  theology  current  during  her  girlhood 


INTRODUCTORY  ix 


is  matter  for  small  wonder.  While  her  Others  were 
men  of  recognized  originality  and  force,  they  did  not 
question  the  religious  teaching  of  the  time;  they 
were  leaders  in  town  and  church,  even  strict  and 
uncompromising  in  their  piety.  Reverence  for 
accepted  ways  and  forms,  merely  as  such,  seems 
entirely  to  have  been  left  out  of  Emily's  constitu- 
tion. To  her,  God  was  not  a  far-away  and  dreary 
Power  to  be  daily  addressed,  —  the  great  *  Eclipse  * 
of  which  she  wrote,  —  but  He  was  near  and  familiar 
and  pervasive.  Her  garden  was  full  of  His  bright- 
ness and  glory ;  the  birds  sang  and  the  sky  glowed 
because  of  Him.  To  shut  herself  out  of  the  sun- 
shine in  a  church,  dark,  chilly,  restricted,  was  rather 
to  shut  herself  away  from  Him  ;  almost  pathetically 
she  wrote,  '  I  believe  the  love  of  God  may  be  taught 
not  to  seem  like  bears.' 

In  essence,  no  real  irreverence  mars  her  poems 
or  her  letters.  Of  malice  aforethought,  —  an  inten- 
tional irreverence,  —  she  is  never  once  guilty.  The 
old  interpretation  of  the  biblical  estimate  of  life  was 
cause  to  her  for  gentle,  wide-eyed  astonishment. 
No  one  knew  better  the  phrases  which  had  become 
cant,  and  which  seemed  always  to  misrepresent  the 
Father  Whom  she  knew  with  personal  directness 
and  without  necessity  for  human  intervention.  It 
was  a  theologically  misconceived  idea  of  a  'jealous 
God,'  for  which  she  had  a  profound  contempt ;  and 
the  fact  that  those  ideas  were  still  held  by  the  stricter 
New  England   people   of  her  day  made   not  the 


INTRODUCTORY 


slightest  difference  in  her  expression  of  disapproval. 
Fearless  and  daring,  she  had  biblical  quotation  at 
her  finger-tips;  and  even  if  she  sometimes  used  it 
in  a  way  which _  might  shock  a  conventionalist,  she 
had  in  her  heart  too  profound  an  adoration  for  the 
great,  ever-living,  and  present  Father  to  hold  a 
shadow  of  real  irreverence  toward  Him,  so  pecu- 
liarly near.  No  soul  in  which  dwelt  not  a  very 
noble  and  actual  love  and  respect  for  the  essen- 
tials could  have  written  as  she  did  of  real  triumph, 
of  truth,  of  aspiration. 

*  We  never  know  how  high  we  are, 

Till  we  are  called  to  rise ; 
And  then,  if  we  are  true  to  plan, 
Our  statures  touch  the  skies. 

*  The  heroism  we  recite 

"Would  be  a  daily  thing 
Did  not  ourselves  the  cubits  warp, 
For  fear  to  be  a  king.' 

Must  not  one  who  wrote  that  have  had  her  ever- 
open  shrine,  her  reverenced  tribunal? 

The  whims  and  pretences  of  society,  its  forms 
and  unrealities,  seemed  to  her  thin  and  unworthy. 
Conventionalities,  while  they  amused,  exasperated 
her  also ;  and  the  little  poem  beginning, 

*  The  show  is  not  the  show, 
But  they  that  go,' 

expresses  in  large  measure  her  attitude  toward  soci- 
ety, when  she  lived  in  the  midst  of  it.  Real  life, 
on  the  other  hand,  seemed  vast  and  inexpressibly 


INTRODIK  XI 


solemn.  Petty  trivialities  had  hc^'^part  in  her  con- 
stitution, and  she  came  to  despise  them  more  and 
more,  —  so  much,  indeed,  that  with  her  increasing 
shyness,  she  gradually  gave  up  all  journeys,  and 
finally  retired  completely  from  even  the  simple  life 
of  a  New  England  college  town. 

As  has  been  said  of  Emily  Bronte,  '  To  this  natural 
isolation  of  spirit  we  are  in  a  great  measure  in- 
debted for  that  passionate  love  of  Nature  which 
gives  such  a  vivid  reality  and  exquisite  simplicity  to 
her  descriptions.'  Emily  Dickinson's  letters,  almost 
as  much  as  the  poems,  exhibit  her  elf-like  intimacy 
with  Nature.  She  sees  and  apprehends  the  great 
mother's  processes,  and  shares  the  rapture  of  all 
created  things  under  the  wide  sky.  The  letters 
speak  of  flowers,  of  pines  and  autumnal  colors  ;  but 
no  natural  sight  or  sound  or  incident  seems  to  have 
escaped  her  delicate  apprehension. 

Bird  songs,  crickets,  frost,  and  winter  winds,  even 
the  toad  and  snake,  mushrooms  and  bats,  have  an  in- 
describable charm  for  her,  which  she  in  turn  brings 
to  us.  March,  *  that  month  of  proclamation,'  was 
especially  dear;  and  among  her  still  unpublished 
verses  is  a  characteristic  greeting  to  the  windy 
month.  In  all  its  aspects  '  Nature  became  the 
unique  charm  and  consolation  of  her  life,  and  as 
such  she  has  written  of  it.* 

Warm  thanks  are  due  the  friends  who  have  gen- 
erously lent  letters  for  reproduction.  That  they 
were   friends   of  Emily  Dickinson,  and  willing  to 


V 


xii  IN2  UCTORY 


share  her  wora.  the  larger  outsid^xu-cle,  wait- 

ing and  appreciative,  entitles  them  to  the  gratitude, 
not  merely  of  the  Editor,  but  of  all  who  make  up 
the  world  that  Emily  'never  saw,*  but  to  which, 
nevertheless,  she  sent  a  'message.* 


MABEL  LOOMIS   TODD 


Amherst,  Massachusetts 
October  1894 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 

VOLUME   I 


Pagb 

Introductory    v 

Chapter 

I.    To  Mrs  A.  P.  Strong    ....    (1845- 1853)  ' 

II.    To  Mr  W.  a,  Dickinson  .    .    .    (1847-1854)  65 

III.  To   Mrs  Gordon  I*  Ford,  Mr 

BowDOiN,  Mrs  Anthon,  and 

Miss  Lavinia  Dickinson  .    .    (1848-1865)  125 

IV.  To  Dr  and  Mrs  J.  G.  Holland    (1853-1883)  155 
V.    To  Mr  and  Mrs  Samuel  Bowles    (1858-1S81)  189 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS 


Child  Portrait  of  Emily  Dickinson        .  Frontispiece 

Pagb 

Letter  to  Dr  and  Mrs  Holland, /j^j/»i«//      .'159 


Letter  to  Mr  Samuel  BowhESf  facsimile      .    .    .    2i8 


/ 


LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON 


CHAPTER  I 

To  Mrs  A.  P.  Strong 

'THHE  letters  in  this  chapter  were  written 
-*■  to  a  schoolmate  and  early  friend.  The 
first  is  one  of  the  oldest  yet  found,  dated 
when  Emily  Dickinson  had  but  recently  passed 
her  fourteenth  birthday. 

Before  the  era  of  outer  envelopes,  it  is 
quaintly  written  on  a  large  square  sheet,  and 
so  folded  that  the  fourth  page  forms  a  cover 
bearing  the  address.  Most  of  the  remaining 
letters  to  Mrs  Strong  are  thus  folded,  and 
sealed  either  with  wax  or  wafers,  —  occasion- 
ally with  little  rectangular  or  diamond  papers 
bearing  mottoes  stamped  in  gold.  The  hand- 
writing is  almost  microscopic,  the  pages  en- 
tirely filled.  Merely  personal  items  have  been 
generally  omitted. 

It  will  be  seen  that  the  name  '  Emilie  E. 
Dickinson '  is  sometimes   used.     The  ie  was 

VOL.  I.  —  I 


LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON 


CHAPTER  I 

To  Mrs  A.  P.  Strong 

'TPHE  letters  in  this  chapter  were  written 
^  to  a  schoolmate  and  early  friend.  The 
first  is  one  of  the  oldest  yet  found,  dated 
when  Emily  Dickinson  had  but  recently  passed 
her  fourteenth  birthday. 

Before  the  era  of  outer  envelopes,  it  is 
quaintly  written  on  a  large  square  sheet,  and 
so  folded  that  the  fourth  page  forms  a  cover 
bearing  the  address.  Most  of  the  remaining 
letters  to  Mrs  Strong  are  thus  folded,  and 
sealed  either  with  wax  or  wafers,  —  occasion- 
ally with  little  rectangular  or  diamond  papers 
bearing  mottoes  stamped  in  gold.  The  hand- 
writing is  almost  microscopic,  the  pages  en- 
tirely filled.  Merely  personal  items  have  been 
generally  omitted. 

It  will  be  seen  that  the  name  '  Emilie  E. 
Dickinson  *  is  sometimes   used.     The  ie  was 

VOL.  I. —  I 


LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON 


CHAPTER  I 

To  Mrs  A,  P.  Strong 

'THHE  letters  in  this  chapter  were  written 
-*■  to  a  schoolmate  and  early  friend.  The 
first  is  one  of  the  oldest  yet  found,  dated 
when  Emily  Dickinson  had  but  recently  passed 
her  fourteenth  birthday. 

Before  the  era  of  outer  envelopes,  it  is 
quaintly  written  on  a  large  square  sheet,  and 
so  folded  that  the  fourth  page  forms  a  cover 
bearing  the  address.  Most  of  the  remaining 
letters  to  Mrs  Strong  are  thus  folded,  and 
sealed  either  with  wax  or  wafers,  —  occasion- 
ally with  little  rectangular  or  diamond  papers 
bearing  mottoes  stamped  in  gold.  The  hand- 
writing is  almost  microscopic,  the  pages  en- 
tirely filled.  Merely  personal  items  have  been 
generally  omitted. 

It  will  be  seen  that  the  name  '  Emilie  E. 
Dickinson '  is  sometimes   used.     The  ie  was 

VOL.  I.  —  I 


2  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1845 

a  youthful  vagary,  and  the  second  initial,  E., 
stood  for  Elizabeth,  a  *  middle  name  '  entirely 
discarded  in  later  years. 

Amherst,  Feb.  23,  1845. 

Dear  A.,  —  After  receiving  the  smitings  of  con- 
science for  a  long  time,  I  have  at  length  succeeded 
in  stifling  the  voice  of  that  faithful  monitor  by  a 
promise  of  a  long  letter  to  you ;  so  leave  everything 
and  sit  down  prepared  for  a  long  siege  in  the  shape 
of  a  bundle  of  nonsense  from  friend  E. 

...  I  keep  your  lock  of  hair  as  precious  as  gold 
and  a  great  deal  more  so.  I  often  look  at  it  when 
I  go  to  my  little  lot  of  treasures,  and  wish  the  owner 
of  that  glossy  lock  were  here.  Old  Time  wags  on 
pretty  much  as  usual  at  Amherst,  and  I  know  of 
nothing  that  has  occurred  to  break  the  silence ; 
however,  the  reduction  of  the  postage  has  excited 
my  risibles  somewhat.  Only  think  !  We  can  send 
a  letter  before  long  for  five  little  coppers  only,  filled 
with  the  thoughts  and  advice  of  dear  friends.  But 
I  will  not  get  into  a  philosophizing  strain  just  yet. 
There  is  time  enough  for  that  upon  another  page 
of  this  mammoth  sheet.  ...  Your  beau  ideal  D. 
I  have  not  seen  lately.  I  presume  he  was  changed 
into  a  star  some  night  while  gazing  at  them,  and 
placed  in  the  constellation  Orion  between  Bellatrix 
and  Betelgeux.  I  doubt  not  if  he  was  here  he 
would  wish  to  be  kindly  remembered  to  you. 
What  delightful  weather  we  have  had  for  a  week  ! 


1845]  '^O  MRS  STRONG  3 

It  seems  more  like  smiling  May  crowned  with  flow- 
ers than  cold,  arctic  February  wading  through  snow- 
drifts. I  have  heard  some  sweet  little  birds  sing, 
but  I  fear  we  shall  have  more  cold  weather  and  their 
little  bills  will  be  frozen  up  before  their  songs  are 
finished.  My  plants  look  beautifully.  Old  King 
Frost  has  not  had  the  pleasure  of  snatching  any  of 
them  in  his  cold  embrace  as  yet,  and  I  hope  will 
not.  Our  little  pussy  has  made  out  to  live.  I  believe 
you  know  what  a  fatality  attends  our  little  kitties,  all 
of  them,  having  had  six  die  one  right  after  the  other. 
Do  you  love  your  little  niece  J.  as  well  as  ever? 
Your  soliloquy  on  the  year  that  is  past  and  gone  was 
not  unheeded  by  me.  Would  that  we  might  spend 
the  year  which  is  now  fleeting  so  swiftly  by  to  better 
advantage  than  the  one  which  we  have  not  the  power 
to  recall !  Now  I  know  you  will  laugh,  and  say  I 
wonder  what  makes  Emily  so  sentimental.  But  I 
don't  care  if  you  do,  for  I  sha'n't  hear  you.  What 
are  you  doing  this  winter?  I  am  about  everything. 
I  am  now  working  a  pair  of  slippers  to  adorn  my 
father's  feet.  I  wish  you  would  come  and  help  me 
finish  them.  .  .  .  Although  it  is  late  in  the  day,  I 
am  going  to  wish  you  a  happy  New  Year,  —  not  but 
what  I  think  your  New  Year  will  pass  just  as  happily 
without  it,  but  to  make  a  little  return  for  your  kind 
wish,  which  so  far  in  a  good  many  respects  has  been 
granted,  probably  because  you  wished  that  it  might 
be  so.  ...  I  go  to  singing-school  Sabbath  evenings 
to  improve  my  voice.     Don't  you  envy  me  ?  .  .  . 


/ 


4  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1845 

I  wish  you  would  come  and  make  me  a  long  visit. 
If  you  will,  I  will  entertain  you  to  the  best  of  my 
abilities,  which  you  know  are  neither  few  nor  small. 
Why  can't  you  persuade  your  father  and  mother  to 
let  you  come  here  to  school  next  term,  and  keep  me 

company,  as  I  am  going  ?    Miss ,  I  presume  you 

can  guess  who  I  mean,  is  going  to  finish  her  educa- 
tion next  summer.  The  finishing  stroke  is  to  be  put 
on  at  Newton.  She  will  then  have  learned  all  that 
we  poor  foot-travellers  are  toiling  up  the  hill  of 
knowledge  to  acquire.  Wonderful  thought !  Her 
horse  has  carried  her  along  so  swiftly  that  she  has 
nearly  gained  the  summit,  and  we  are  plodding  along 
on  foot  after  her.  Well  said  and  sufficient  this. 
We  '11  finish  an  education  sometime,  won't  we  ?  You 
may  then  be  Plato,  and  I  will  be  Socrates,  provided 
you  won't  be  wiser  than  I  am.  Lavinia  just  now 
interrupted  my  flow  of  thought  by  saying  give  my 
love  to  A.  I  presume  you  will  be  glad  to  have  some 
one  break  off  this  epistle.  All  the  girls  send  much 
love  to  you.  And  please  accept  a  large  share  for 
yourself.  From  your  beloved 

Emily  E.  Dickinson. 

Please  send  me  a  copy  of  that  Romance  you  were 
writing  at  Amherst.  I  am  in  a  fever  to  read  it.  I 
expect  it  will  be  against  my  Whig  feelings. 

After  this  postscript  many  others  follow, 
across  the   top,   down  the'  edges,  tucked    in 


1845]  ^^  ^^S  STRONG  5 

wherever  space  will  allow.  There  are  also  a 
few  lines  from  each  of  three  girl  friends  to 
*  dear  A/ 

Amherst,  May  7,  1845. 

Dear  A.,  —  It  seems  almost  an  age  since  I  have 
seen  you,  and  it  is  indeed  an  age  for  friends  to  be 
separated.  I  was  delighted  to  receive  a  paper  from 
you,  and  I  also  was  much  pleased  with  the  news  it 
contained,  especially  that  you  are  taking  lessons  on 
the '  piny,'  as  you  always  call  it.  But  remember  not  to 
get  on  ahead  of  me.  Father  intends  to  have  a  piano 
very  soon.  How  happy  I  shall  be  when  I  have  one 
of  my  own  !  Old  Father  Time  has  wrought  many 
changes  here  since  your  last  short  visit.  Miss  S.  T. 
and  Miss  N.  M.  have  both  taken  the  marriage  vows 
upon  themselves.  Dr  Hitchcock  has  moved  into 
his  new  house,  and  Mr  Tyler  across  the  way  from 
our  house  has  moved  into  President  Hitchcock's  old 
house.  Mr  C.  is  going  to  move  into  Mr  T.'s  former 
house,  but  the  worst  thing  old  Time  has  done  here  is 
he  has  walked  so  fast  as  to  overtake  H.  M.  and  carry 
her  to  Hartford  on  last  week  Saturday.  I  was  so 
vexed  with  him  for  it  that  I  ran  after  him  and  made 
out  to  get  near  enough  to  him  to  put  some  salt  on 
his  tail,  when  he  fled  and  left  me  to  run  home  alone. 
.  .  .  Viny  went  to  Boston  this  morning  with  father, 
to  be  gone  a  fortnight,  and  I  am  left  alone  in  all  my 
glory.  I  suppose  she  has  got  there  before  this  time, 
and  is  probably  staring  with  mouth  and  eyes  wide 


/ 


f 


6  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1845 

open  at  the  wonders  of  the  city.  I  have  been  to 
walk  to-night,  and  got  some  very  choice  wild  flowers. 
I  wish  you  had  some  of  them.  Viny  and  I  both  go 
to  school  this  term.  We  have  a  very  fine  school. 
I'here  are  dTi  scholars.  I  have  four  studies.  They 
are  Mental  Philosophy,  Geology,  Latin,  and  Botany. 
How  large  they  sound,  don't  they?  I  don't  believe 
you  have  such  big  studies.  .  .  .  My  plants  look  finely 
now.  I  am  going  to  send  you  a  little  geranium  leaf 
in  this  letter,  which  you  must  press  for  me.  Have 
you  made  you  an  herbarium  yet?  I  hope  you  will 
if  you  have  not,  it  would  be  such  a  treasure  to  you ; 
'most  all  the  girls  are  making  one.  If  you  do,  per- 
haps I  can  make  some  additions  to  it  from  flowers 
growing  around  here.  How  do  you  enjoy  your  school 
this  term  ?  Are  the  teachers  as  pleasant  as  our  old 
school-teachers?  I  expect  you  have  a  great  many 
prim,  starched  up  young  ladies  there,  who,  I  doubt 
not,  are  perfect  models  of  propriety  and  good  behav- 
ior. If  they  are,  don't  let  your  free  spirit  be  chained 
by  them.  I  don't  know  as  there  [are]  any  in  school 
of  this  stamp.  But  there  'most  always  are  a  few, 
whom  the  teachers  look  up  to  and  regard  as  their 
satellites.  I  am  growing  handsome  very  fast  indeed  ! 
I  expect  I  shall  be  the  belle  of  Amherst  when  I  reach 
my  1 7th  year.  I  don't  doubt  that  I  shall  have  per- 
fect crowds  of  admirers  at  that  age.  Then  how  I 
shall  delight  to  make  them  await  my  bidding,  and 
with  what  delight  shall  I  witness  their  suspense  while 
I  make  my  final  decision.     But  away  with  my  non- 


1845]  "^O  MRS  STRONG 


sense.  I  have  written  one  composition  this  term, 
and  I  need  not  assure  you  it  was  exceedingly  edify- 
ing to  myself  as  well  as  everybody  else.  Don't  you 
want  to  see  it?  I  really  wish  you  could  have  a 
chance.  We  are  obliged  to  write  compositions  once 
in  a  fortnight,  and  select  a  piece  to  read  from 
some  interesting  book  the  week  that  we  don't  write 
compositions. 

We  really  have  some  most  charming  young  women 
in  school  this  term.  I  sha'n't  call  them  an)rthing 
but  women,  for  women  they  are  in  every  sense  of 
the  word.  I  must,  however,  describe  one,  and  while 
I  describe  her  I  wish  Imagination,  who  is  ever  pres- 
ent with  you,  to  make  a  little  picture  of  this  self-same 
young  lady  in  your  mind,  and  by  her  aid  see  if  you 
cannot  conceive  how  she  looks.  Well,  to  begin.  .  .  . 
Then  just  imagine  her  as  she  is,  and  a  huge  string  of 
gold  beads  encircling  her  neck,  and  don't  she  present 
a  lively  picture ;  and  then  she  is  so  bustling,  she  is 
always  whizzing  about,  and  whenever  I  come  in  con- 
tact with  her  I  really  think  I  am  in  a  hornet's  nest. 
I  can't  help  thinking  every  time  I  see  this  singular 
piece  of  humanity  of  Shakespeare's  description  of  a 
tempest  in  a  teapot.  But  I  must  not  laugh  about 
her,  for  I  verily  believe  she  has  a  good  heart,  and 
that  is  the  principal  thing  now-a-days.  Don't  you 
hope  I  shall  become  wiser  in  the  company  of  such 
virtuosos?  It  would  certainly  be  desirable.  Have 
you  noticed  how  beautifully  the  trees  look  now? 
They  seem  to  be  completely  covered  with  fragrant 


8  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1845 

blossoms.  ...  I  had  so  many  things  to  do  for  Viny, 
as  she  was  going  away,  that  very  much  against  my 
wishes  I  deferred  writing  you  until  now,  but  forgive 
and  forget,  dear  A.,  and  I  will  promise  to  do  better 
in  future.  Do  write  me  soon,  and  let  it  be  a  long, 
long  letter ;  and  when  you  can't  get  time  to  write, 
send  a  paper,  so  as  to  let  me  know  you  think  of  me 
still,  though  we  are  separated  by  hill  and  stream. 
All  the  girls  send  much  love  to  you.  Don't  forget 
to  let  me  receive  a  letter  from  you  soon.  I  can  say 
no  more  now  as  my  paper  is  all  filled  up. 

Your  affectionate  friend, 

Emily  E.  Dickinson. 

[Written  in  1845;  postmarked  Amherst,  August  4.] 

Sabbath  Eve, 

Dear  A.,  —  I  have  now  sat  down  to  write  you  a 
long,  long  letter.  My  writing  apparatus  is  upon  a 
stand  before  me,  and  all  things  are  ready.  I  have 
no  flowers  before  me  as  you  had  to  inspire  you. 
But  then  you  know  I  can  imagine  myself  inspired 
by  them,  and  perhaps  that  will  do  as  well.  You 
cannot  imagine  how  delighted  I  was  to  receive  your 
letter.  It  was  so  full,  and  everything  in  it  was  inter- 
esting to  me  because  it  came  from  you.  I  presume 
you  did  not  doubt  my  gratitude  for  it,  on  account 
of  my  delaying  so  long  to  answer  it,  for  you  know  I 
have  had  no  leisure  for  anything.  When  I  tell  you 
that  our  term  has  been  eleven  weeks  long,  and  that 
I  have  had  four  studies  and  taken  music  lessons,  you 


1845]  TO  MRS  STRONG 


can  imagine  a  little  how  my  time  has  been  taken  up 
lately.  I  will  try  to  be  more  punctual  in  such  mat- 
ters for  the  future.  How  are  you  now  ?  I  am  very 
sorry  to  hear  that  you  are  unable  to  remain  in  your 
school  on  account  of  your  health,  it  must  be  such 
a  disappointment  to  you.  But  I  presume  you  are 
enjoying  yourself  much  to  be  at  home  again.  You 
asked  me  in  your  last  letter  if  old  Father  Time 
wagged  on  in  Amherst  pretty  much  as  ever.  For 
my  part,  I  see  no  particular  change  in  his  move- 
ments unless  it  be  that  he  goes  on  a  swifter  pace 
than  formerly,  and  that  he  wields  his  sickle  more 
sternly  than  ever.  How  do  you  like  taking  music 
lessons?     I  presume  you  are  delighted  with  it.     1 

am  taking  lessons  this  term  of  Aunt  S ,  who  is 

spending  the  summer  with  us.  I  never  enjoyed 
myself  more  than  I  have  this  summer;  for  we 
have  had  such  a  delightful  school  and  such  pleasant 
teachers,  and  besides  I  have  had  a  piano  of  my 
own.  Our  examination  is  to  come  off  next  week 
on  Monday.  I  wish  you  could  be  here  at  that  time. 
Why  can't  you  come?  If  you  will,  you  can  come 
and  practise  on  my  piano  as  much  as  you  wish  to. 
I  am  already  gasping  in  view  of  our  examination ; 
and  although  I  am  determined  not  to  dread  it  I 
know  it  is  so  foolish,  yet  in  spite  of  my  heroic  reso- 
lutions, I  cannot  avoid  a  few  misgivings  when  I 
think  of  those  tall,  stem  trustees,  and  when  I  know 
that  I  shall  lose  my  character  if  I  don't  recite  as 
precisely  as  the  laws  of  the  Medes  and  Persians. 


lO  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1845 

But  what  matter  will  that  be  a  hundred  years  hence  ? 
I  will  distress  you  no  longer  with  my  fears,  for  you 
know  well  enough  what  they  are  without  my  enter- 
ing into  any  explanations.  Are  you  practising  now 
you  are  at  home?  I  hope  you  are,  for  if  you  are 
not  you  would  be  likely  to  forget  what  you  have 
learnt.  I  want  very  much  to  hear  you  play.  I  have 
the  same  instruction  book  that  you  have,  Bertini, 

and  I  am  getting  along  in  it  very  well.     Aunt  S 

says  she  sha'n't  let  me  have  many  tunes  now,  for  she 
wants  I  should  get  over  in  the  book  a  good  ways  first. 

Oh,  A.,  if  Sarah  G ,  H ,  and  yourself  were 

only  here  this  summer,  what  times  we  should  have  ! 
I  wish  if  we  can't  be  together  all  the  time  that  we 
could  meet  once  in  a  while  at  least.  I  wish  you 
would  all  come  to  our  house,  and  such  times  as  we 
would  have  would  be  a  caution.  I  want  to  see  you 
all  so  much  that  it  seems  as  if  I  could  not  wait. 
Have  you  heard  anything  from  Miss  Adams,  our 
dear  teacher?  How  much  I  would  give  to  see  her 
once  more,  but  I  am  afraid  I  never  shall.  She  is  so 
far  away.  You  asked  me  in  your  letter  to  tell  you 
all  the  news  worth  telling,  and  although  there  is  not 
much,  yet  I  will  endeavor  to  think  of  everything 
that  will  be  new  to  you.  In  the  first  place,  Mrs 
J.  and  Mrs  S.  M.  have  both  of  them  a  little  daugh- 
ter. Very  promising  children,  I  understand.  I 
don't  doubt  if  they  live  they  will  be  ornaments  to 
society.  I  think  they  are  both  to  be  considered 
as  embryos  of  future  usefulness.     Mrs  W.  M.  has 


1&amp;45]  3rO  MIfS  SmOXG  1 1 

now  two  grand-daughters.  Is  n't  she  to  be  en\ned  ? 
...  I  am  sorry  that  you  are  la}-ing  up  H.'s  sins 
against  her.  I  think  you  had  better  heap  coals  of 
fire  upon  her  head  by  writing  to  her  constantly  until 
you  get  an  answer.  I  have  some  patience  with 
these  'school  marms.'  They  have  so  many  trials. 
I  hope  you  will  decide  to  blot  out  her  iniquities 
against  her.  I  don't  know  about  this  Mr  E.  giv- 
ing you  concert  tickets.  I  think  for  my  part  it 
looks  rather  suspicious.  He  is  a  young  man,  I  sup- 
pose. These  music  teachers  are  always  such  high- 
souled  beings  that  I  think  they  would  exactly  suit 
your  fancy.  My  garden  looks  beautifully  now.  I 
wish  you  could  see  it.  I  would  send  you  a  bouquet 
if  I  could  get  a  good  opportunity.  My  house  plants 
look  very  finely,  too.  You  wished  me  to  give  you 
some  account  of  S.  P.  She  is  attending  school  this 
term  and  studying  Latin  and  Algebra.  She  is  very 
well  and  happy  and  sends  much  love  to  you.  All 
the  girls  send  much  love  to  you,  and  wish  you  to 
write  to  them.  I  have  been  working  a  beautiful 
book-mark  to  give  to  one  of  our  school-giris.  Per- 
haps you  have  seen  it.  It  is  an  arrow  with  a  beau- 
tiful wreath  around  it.  Have  you  altered  any  since 
I  have  seen  you  ?  Is  n't  it  a  funny  question  for  one 
friend  to  ask  another?  I  haven't  altered  any,  I 
think,  except  that  I  have  my  hair  done  up,  and  that 
makes  me  look  different.  I  can  imagine  just  how 
you  look  now.  I  wonder  what  you  are  doing  this 
moment.     I  have  got  an  idea  that  you  are  knitting 


f 

« 

12  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1845 

edging.  Are  you?  Won't  you  tell  me  when  you 
answer  my  letter  whether  I  guessed  right  or  not? 
.  .  .  You  gave  me  a  compliment  in  your  letter  in 
regard  to  my  being  a  faithful  correspondent.  I 
must  say  I  think  I  deserve  it.  I  have  been  learn- 
ing several  beautiful  pieces  lately.  The  'Grave  of 
Bonaparte*  is  one,  'Lancers  Quickstep,*  and  'Maiden, 
weep  no  more,*  which  is  a  sweet  little  song.  I  wish 
much  to  see  you  and  hear  you  play.  I  hope  you 
will  come  to  A.  before  long.  Why  can*t  you  pass 
commencement  here  ?  I  do  wish  you  would.  .  .  . 
I  have  looked  my  letter  over,  and  find  I  have  written 
nothing  worth  reading.  .  .  .  Accept  much  love  from 

your  affectionate  friend, 

Emily  E.  D. 

Thursday,  Sept.  26,  1845. 

Dearest  A.,  —  As  I  just  glanced  at  the  clock 
and  saw  how  smoothly  the  little  hands  glide  over 
the  surface,  I  could  scarcely  believe  that  those  self- 
same little  hands  had  eloped  with  so  many  of  my 
precious  moments  since  I  received  your  affectionate 
letter,  and  it  was  still  harder  for  me  to  believe  that 
I,  who  am  always  boasting  of  being  so  faithful  a  cor- 
respondent, should  have  been  guilty  of  negligence 
in  so  long  delaying  to  answer  it.  ...  I  am  very 
glad  to  hear  that  you  are  better  than  you  have  been, 
and  I  hope  in  future  disease  will  not  be  as  neigh- 
borly as  he  has  been  heretofore  to  either  of  us.  I 
long  to  see  you,  dear  A.,  and  speak  with  you  face 


1845]  TO  MRS  STRONG  1 3 

to  face ;  but  so  long  as  a  bodily  interview  is  denied 
us,  we  must  make  letters  answer,  though  it  is  hard 
for  friends  to  be  separated.  I  really  believe  you 
would  have  been  frightened  to  have  heard  me  scold 
when  Sabra  informed  me  that  you  had  decided  not 
to  visit  Amherst  this  fall.  But  as  I  could  find  no 
one  upon  whom  to  vent  my  spleen  for  your  decision, 
I  thought  it  best  to  be  calm,  and  therefore  have  at 
length  resigned  myself  to  my  cruel  fate,  though  with 
not  a  very  good  grace.  I  think  you  do  well  to 
inquire  whether  anything  has  been  heard  from  H. 
I  really  don't  know  what  has  become  of  her,  unless 
procrastination  has  carried  her  off.  I  think  that 
must  be  the  case.  I  think  you  have  given  quite  a 
novel  description  of  the  wedding.  Are  you  quite 
sure  Mr  F.,  the  minister,  told  them  to  stand  up  and 
he  would  tie  them  in  a  great  bow-knot  ?  But  I  beg 
pardon  for  speaking  so  lightly  of  so  solemn  a  cere- 
mony. You  asked  me  in  your  letter  if  I  did  not 
think  you  partial  in  your  admiration  of  Miss  Helen 
H.,  ditto  Mrs  P.  I  answer,  Not  in  the  least.  She 
was  universally  beloved  in  Amherst.  She  made  us 
quite  a  visit  in  June,  and  we  regretted  more  than 
ever  that  she  was  going  where  we  could  not  see  her 
as  often  as  we  had  been  accustomed.  She  seemed 
very  happy  in  her  prospects,  and  seemed  to  think 
distance  nothing  in  comparison  to  a  home  with  the 
one  of  her  choice.  I  hope  she  will  be  happy, 
and  of  course  she  will.  I  wished  much  to  see  her 
once  more,  but  was  denied  the  privilege.  .  .  .  You 


i 

i 

I 

14  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1845 

asked  me  if  I  was  attending  school  now.  I  am 
not.  Mother  thinks  me  not  able  to  confine  myself 
to  school  this  term.  She  had  rather  I  would  exer- 
cise, and  I  can  assure  you  I  get  plenty  of  that  article 
by  staying  at  home.  I  am  going  to  learn  to  make 
bread  to-morrow.  So  you  may  imagine  me  with  my 
sleeves  rolled  up,  mixing  flour,  milk,  saleratus,  etc., 
with  a  deal  of  grace.  I  advise  you  if  you  don't 
know  how  to  make  the  staff  of  life  to  learn  with 
dispatch.  I  think  I  could  keep  house  very  com- 
fortably if  I  knew  how  to  cook.  But  as  long  as  I 
don't,  my  knowledge  of  housekeeping  is  about  of 
as  much  use  as  faith  without  works,  which  you  know 
we  are  told  is  dead.  Excuse  my  quoting  from 
Scripture,  dear  A.,  for  it  was  so  handy  in  this  case 
I  could  n't  get  along  very  well  without  it.  Since  I 
wrote  you  last,  the  summer  is  past  and  gone,  and 
autumn  with  the  sere  and  yellow  leaf  is  already 
upon  us.  I  never  knew  the  time  to  pass  so  swiftly, 
it  seems  to  me,  as  the  past  summer.  I  really  think 
some  one  must  have  oiled  his  chariot  wheels,  for  I 
don't  recollect  of  hearing  him  pass,  and  I  am  sure 
I  should  if  something  had  not  prevented  his  chariot 
wheels  from  creaking  as  usual.  But  I  will  not  expa- 
tiate upon  him  any  longer,  for  I  know  it  is  wicked 
to  trifle  with  so  revered  a  personage,  and  I  fear 
he  will  make  me  a  call  in  person  to  inquire  as  to 
the  remarks  which  I  have  made  concerning  him. 
Therefore  I  will  let  him  alone  for  the  present.  .  .  . 
How  are  you  getting  on  with  your  music  ?     Well,  I 


1845]  TO  MRS  STRONG  1 5 

hope  and  trust.  I  am  taking  lessons  and  am  get- 
ting along  very  well,  and  now  I  have  a  piano,  I  am 
very  happy.  I  feel  much  honored  at  having  even  a 
doll  named  for  me.  I  believe  I  shall  have  to  give 
it  a  silver  cup,  as  that  is  the  custom  among  old 
ladies  when  a  child  is  named  for  them.  .  .  .  Have 
you  any  flowers  now?  I  have  had  a  beautiful  flower- 
garden  this  summer ;  but  they  are  nearly  gone  now. 
It  is  very  cold  to-night,  and  I  mean  to  pick  the  pret- 
tiest ones  before  I  go  to  bed,  and  cheat  Jack  Frost 
of  so  many  of  the  treasures  he  calculates  to  rob 
to-night.  Won't  it  be  a  capital  idea  to  put  him  at 
defiance,  for  once  at  least,  if  no  more?  I  would 
love  to  send  you  a  bouquet  if  I  had  an  opportunity, 
and  you  could  press  it  and  write  under  it.  The  last 
flowers  of  summer.  Wouldn't  it  be  poetical,  and 
you  know  that  is  what  young  ladies  aim  to  be  now- 
a-days.  ...  I  expect  I  have  altered  a  good  deal 
since  I  have  seen  you,  dear  A.  I  have  grown  tall  a 
good  deal,  and  wear  my  golden  tresses  done  up  in 
a  net-cap.  Modesty,  you  know,  forbids  me  to  men- 
tion whether  my  personal  appearance  has  altered. 
I  leave  that  for  others  to  judge.  But  my  [word 
omitted]  has  not  changed,  nor  will  it  in  time  to 
come.  I  shall  always  remain  the  same  old  six- 
pence. ...  I  can  say  no  more  now,  as  it  is  after 
ten,  and  everybody  has  gone  to  bed  but  me.  Don't 
forget  your  affectionate  friend, 

Emh^y  E.  D. 


1 6  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1846 

Amherst,  Jan.  12, 1846. 
A.,  MY  DEAR,  —  Since  I  received  your  precious 
letter  another  year  has  commenced  its  course,  and 
the  old  year  has  gone  never  to  return.  How  sad 
it  makes  one  feel  to  sit  down  quietly  and  think  of 
the  flight  of  the  old  year,  and  the  unceremonious 
obtrusion  of  the  new  year  upon  our  notice  I  How 
many  things  we  have  omitted  to  do  which  might 
have  cheered  a  human  heart,  or  whispered  hope 
in  the  ear  of  the  sorrowful,  and  how  many  things 
have  we  done  over  which  the  dark  mantle  of  regret 
will  ever  fall !  How  many  good  resolutions  did  I 
make  at  the  commencement  of  the  year  now  flown, 
merely  to  break  them  and  to  feel  more  than  ever 
convinced  of  the  weakness  of  my  own  resolutions ! 
The  New  Year's  day  was  unusually  gloomy  to  me, 
I  know  not  why,  and  perhaps  for  that  reason  a  host 
of  unpleasant  reflections  forced  themselves  upon 
me  which  I  found  not  easy  to  throw  off.  But 
I  will  no  longer  sentimentalize  upon  the  past,  for 
I  cannot  recall  it.  I  will,  after  inquiring  for  the 
health  of  my  dear  A.,  relapse  into  a  more  lively 
strain.  I  can  hardly  have  patience  to  write,  for  I 
have  not  seen  you  for  so  long  that  I  have  worlds 
of  things  to  tell  you,  and  my  pen  is  not  swift  enough 
to  answer  my  purpose  at  all.  However,  I  will  try 
to  make  it  communicate  as  much  information  as 
possible  and  wait  to  see  your  own  dear  self  once 
more  before  I  relate  all  my  thoughts  which  hav^ 
come  and  gone  since  I  last  saw  you.     I  suppose 


St   seen  a    i 
r,  so  if  my    I 
rvel.  .  .  .    A 


1846]  TO  MRS  STRONG  1 7 

from  your  letter  that  you  are  enjoying  yourself  finely 
this  winter  at  Miss  C.'s  school.  I  would  give  a  great 
deal  if  I  was  there  with  you.  I  don't  go  to  school 
this  winter  except  to  a  recitation  in  German.  Mr 
C.  has  a  very  large  class,  and  father  thought  I  might 
never  have  another  opportunity  to  study  it.  It 
takes  about  an  hour  and  a  half  to  recite.  Then  I 
take  music  lessons  and  practise  two  hours  in  a  day, 
and  besides  these  two  I  have  a  large  stand  of  plants 
to  cultivate.  This  is  the  principal  round  of  my 
occupation  this  winter.  ...  I  have  just  seen  a 
funeral  procession  go  by  of  a  negro  baby, 
ideas  are  rather  dark  you  need  not  marvel. 
Old  Santa  Glaus  was  very  polite  to  me  the  last 
Ghristmas.  I  hung  up  my  stocking  on  the  bed- 
post as  usual.  I  had  a  perfume  bag  and  a  bottle 
of  otto  of  rose  to  go  with  it,,  a  sheet  of  music, 
a  china  mug  with  Forget  me  not  upon  it,  from 
S.  S.,  —  who,  by  the  way,  is  as  handsome,  enter- 
taining, and  as  fine  a  piano  player  as  in  former 
times,  —  a  toilet  cushion,  a  watch  case,  a  fortune- 
teller, and  an  amaranthine  stock  of  pin-cushions  and 
needlebooks,  which  in  ingenuity  and  art  would  rival 
the  works  of  Scripture  Dorcas.  I  found  abundance 
of  candy  in  my  stocking,  which  I  do  not  think  has 
had  the  anticipated  effect  upon  my  disposition,  in 
case  it  was  to  sweeten  it,  also  two  hearts  at  the 
bottom  of  all,  which  I  thought  looked  rather  omi- 
nous ;  but  I  will  not  enter  into  any  more  details,  for 
they  take  up  more  room  than  I  can  spare. 

VOL.  I.  —  2 


1 8  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1846 

Have  n't  we  had  delightful  weather  for  a  week  or 
two  ?  It  seems  as  if  Old  Winter  had  forgotten  him- 
self. Don't  you  believe  he  is  absent-minded?  It 
has  been  bad  weather  for  colds,  however.  I  have 
had  a  severe  cold  for  a  few  days,  and  can  sympathize 
with  you,  though  I  have  been  delivered  from  a  stiff 
neck.  I  think  you  must  belong  to  the  tribe  of  Israel, 
for  you  know  in  the  Bible  the  prophet  calls  them  a 
stiff-necked  generation.  I  have  lately  come  to  the 
conclusion  that  I  am  Eve,  alias  Mrs  Adam.  You 
know  there  is  no  account  of  her  death  in  the  Bible, 
and  why  am  not  I  Eve  ?  If  you  find  any  statements 
which  you  think  likely  to  prove  the  truth  of  the  case, 
I  wish  you  would  send  them  to  me  without  delay. 

Have  you  heard  a  word  from  H.  M.  or  S.  T.? 
I  consider  them  lost  sheep.  I  send  them  a  paper 
every  week  on  Monday,  but  I  never  get  one  in 
return.  I  am  almost  a  mind  to  take  a  hand-car 
and  go  around  to  hunt  them  up.  I  can't  think  that 
they  have  forgotten  us,  and  I  know  of  no  reason 
unless  they  are  sick  why  they  should  delay  so  long 
to  show  any  signs  of  remembrance.  Do  write  me 
soon  a  very  long  letter,  and  tell  me  all  about  yoiu: 
school  and  yourself  too. 

Your  affectionate  friend, 

Emily  E.  Dickinson. 

Friday  Eve  [summer],  1846. 

My  dear  a., — Though  it  is  a  long  time  since  I 
received  your  affectionate  epistle,  yet  when  I  give 


1846]  TO  MRS  STROXG  1 9 

you  my  reasons  for  my  long  delay,  I  know  you  will 
freely  forgive  and  forget  all  past  offences. 

It  seems  to  me  that  time  has  never  flown  so 
swiftly  with  me  as  it  has  the  last  spring.  I  have 
been  busy  every  minute,  and  not  only  so,  but  hur- 
ried all  the  time.  So  you  may  imagine  that  I  have 
not  had  a  spare  moment,  much  though  my  heart  has 
longed  for  it,  to  commune  with  an  absent  friend. 
...  I  presume  you  will  be  wondering  by  this  time 
what  I  am  doing  to  be  in  so  much  haste  as  I  have 
declared  myself  to  be.  Well,  I  will  tell  you.  I  am 
fitting  to  go  to  South  Hadley  Seminary,  and  expect 
if  my  health  is  good  to  enter  that  institution  a  year 
from  next  fall.  Are  you  not  astonished  to  hear  such 
news?  You  cannot  imagine  how  much  I  am  antici- 
pating in  entering  there.  It  has  been  in  my  thought 
by  day,  and  my  dreams  by  night,  ever  since  I  heard 
of  South  Hadley  Seminary.  I  fear  I  am  anticipat- 
ing too  much,  and  that  some  freak  of  fortune  may 
overturn  all  my  airy  schemes  for  future  happiness. 
But  it  is  my  nature  always  to  anticipate  more  than 
I  realize.  .  .  .  Have  you  not  heard  that  Miss  Adams 
—  dear  Miss  Adams  —  is  here  this  term  ?  Oh,  you 
cannot  imagine  how  natural  it  seems  to  see  her 
happy  face  in  school  once  more.  But  it  needs 
Harriet,  Sarah,  and  your  own  dear  self  to  complete 
the  ancient  picture.  I  hope  we  shall  get  you  all 
back  before  Miss  Adams  goes  away  again.  Have 
you  yet  heard  a  word  from  that  prodigal,  —  H.  ?  .  .  . 

Your  affectionate  friend, 

Emily  E.  D. 


20  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DTCKINSON  [1846 

I  send  you  a  memento  in  the  form  of  a  pressed 
flower,  which  you  must  keep. 

A  converted  Jew  has  been  lecturing  here  for  the 
last  week.  His  lectures  were  free,  and  they  were 
on  the  present  condition  of  the  Jews.  Dr  Scudder, 
a  returned  missionary,  is  here  now,  and  he  is  lec- 
turing also.  Have  you  seen  a  beautiful  piece  of 
poetry  which  has  been  going  through  the  papers 
lately?  Are  we  almost  there  ?  is  the  title  of  it.  .  .  . 
I  have  two  hours  to  practise  daily  now  I  am  in 
school.  I  have  been  learning  a  beautiful  things 
which  I  long  to  have  you  hear.  .  .  . 

Boston,  Sept.  8, 1846. 

My  dear  Friend  A.,  —  It  is  a  long,  long  time 
since  I  received  your  welcome  letter,  and  it  be- 
comes me  to  sue  for  forgiveness,  which  I  am  sure 
your  affectionate  heart  will  not  refuse  to  grant.  But 
many  and  unforeseen  circumstances  have  caused  my 
long  delay.  .  .  .  Father  and  mother  thought  a  jour- 
ney would  be  of  service  to  me,  and  accordingly  I 
left  home  for  Boston  week  before  last.  I  had  a 
delightful  ride  in  the  cars,  and  am  now  getting 
settled  down,  if  there  can  be  such  a  state  in  the 
city.  I  am  visiting  in  my  aunt's  family,  and  am 
happy.  Happy!  did  I  say?  No;  not  happy,  but 
contented.  I  have  been  here  a  fortnight  to-day, 
and  in  that  time  I  have  both  seen  and  heard  a  great 
many  wonderful  things.  Perhaps  you  might  like  to 
know  how  I  have   spent  the  time  here.     I   have 


1846]  TO  MRS  STRONG  21 

been  to  Mount  Auburn,  to  the  Chinese  Museum,  to 
Bunker  Hill ;  I  have  attended  two  concerts  and  one 
Horticultural  Exhibition.  I  have  been  upon  the 
top  of  the  State  House,  and  almost  everywhere  that 
you  can  imagine.  Have  you  ever  been  to  Mount 
Auburn?  If  not,  you  can  form  but  slight  con- 
ception of  this  '  City  of  the  Dead.*  It  seems  as  if 
nature  had  formed  this  spot  with  a  distinct  idea  in 
view  of  its  being  a  resting-place  for  her  children, 
where,  wearied  and  disappointed,  they  might  stretch 
themselves  beneath  the  spreading  cypress,  and  close 
their  eyes  '  calmly  as  to  a  night*s  repose,  or  flowers 
at  set  of  sun.' 

The  Chinese  Museum  is  a  great  curiosity.  There 
are  an  endless  variety  of  wax  figures  made  to  re- 
semble the  Chinese,  and  dressed  in  their  costume. 
Also  articles  of  Chinese  manufacture  of  an  innu- 
merable variety  deck  the  rooms.  Two  of  the 
Chinese  go  with  this  exhibition.  One  of  them  is  a 
professor  of  music  in  China,  and  the  other  is  teacher 
of  a  writing-school  at  home.  They  were  both 
wealthy,  and  not  obliged  to  labor,  but  they  were 
also  opium-eaters ;  and  fearing  to  continue  the  prac- 
tice lest  it  destroyed  their  lives,  yet  unable  to 
break  the  '  rigid  chain  of  habit  *  in  their  own  land, 
they  left  their  families,  and  came  to  this  country. 
They  have  now  entirely  overcome  the  practice. 
There  is  something  peculiarly  interesting  to  me  in 
their  self-denial.  The  musician  played  upon  two  of 
his  instruments,   and   accompanied  them  with   his 


i 


22  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1846 

voice.  It  needed  great  command  over  my  risible 
faculties  to  enable  me  to  keep  sober  as  this  amateur 
was  performing ;  yet  he  was  so  very  polite  to  give 
us  some  of  his  native  music  that  we  could  not  do 
otherwise  than  to  express  ourselves  highly  edified 
with  his  performances.  The  writing-master  is  con- 
stantly occupied  in  writing  the  names  of  visitors  who 
request  it,  upon  cards  in  the  Chinese  language,  for 
which  he  charges  12  J  cents  apiece.  He  never  fails 
to  give  his  card  besides  to  the  persons  who  wish  it. 
I  obtained  one  of  his  cards  for  Viny  and  myself,  and 
I  consider  them  very  precious.  Are  you  still  in  Nor- 
wich, and  attending  to  music  ?  I  am  not  now  taking 
lessons,  but  I  expect  to  when  I  return  home. 

Does  it  seem  as  though  September  had  come? 
How  swiftly  summer  has  fled,  and  what  report  has 
it  borne  to  heaven  of  misspent  time  and  wasted 
hours?  Eternity  only  will  answer.  The  ceaseless 
flight  of  the  seasons  is  to  me  a  very  solemn  thought ; 
and  yet  why  do  we  not  strive  to  make  a  better  im- 
provement of  them?  With  how  much  emphasis  the 
poet  has  said,  '  We  take  no  note  of  tim^  l^t  from 
its  loss.  'Twere  wise  in  man  to  give  it  then  a 
tongue.  Pay  no  moment  but  in  just  purchase  of  its 
worth,  and  what  its  worth  ask  death-beds.  They 
can  tell.  Part  with  it  as  with  life  reluctantly.' 
Then  we  have  higher  authority  than  that  of  man  for 
the  improvement  of  our  time.  For  God  has  said, 
'  Work  while  the  day  lasts,  for  the  night  is  coming  in 
the  which  no  man  can  work.*     Let  us  strive  together 


1846]  TO  MRS  STRONG  23 

to  part  with  time  more  reluctantly,  to  watch  the 
pinions  of  the  fleeting  moment  until  they  are  dim 
in  the  distance,  and  the  new-coming  moment  claims 
our  attention.  I  have  perfect  confidence  in  God 
and  His  promises,  and  yet  I  know  not  why  I  feel 
that  the  world  holds  a  predominant  place  in  my 
affections.  .  .  .  Your  affectionate  friend, 

Emily  E.  D. 

Numerous    postscripts    are    appended,    as 
usually :  — 

I  have  really  suffered  from  the  heat  the  last  week. 
I  think  it  remarkable  that  we  should  have  such 
weather  in  September.  There  were  over  one  hun- 
dred deaths  in  Boston  last  week,  a  great  many  of 
them  owing  to  the  heat.  Mr  Taylor,  our  old 
teacher,  was  in  Amherst  at  Commencement  time. 
Oh,  I  do  love  Mr  Taylor.  It  seems  so  like  old 
times  to  meet  Miss  Adams  and  Mr  Taylor  together 
again.  I  could  hardly  refrain  from  singing,  'Auld 
Lang  Syne.*  It  seemed  so  very  a  propos.  Have 
you  forgotten  the  memorable  ride  we  all  took  with 
Mr  Taylor,  '  Long,  long  ago  *  ?  .  .  .  Austin  entered 
college  last  Commencement.  Only  think  !  I  have 
a  brother  who  has  the  honor  to  be  a  Freshman ! 
Will  you  not  promise  me  that  you  will  come  to 
Commencement  when  he  graduates  ?  Do  !  Please  ! 
I  have  altered  very  much  since  you  were  here.  I 
am  now  very  tall,  and  wear  long  dresses  nearly.  Do 
you  believe  we  shall  know  each  other  when  we  meet  ? 
/  Don*t  forget  to  write  soon.  E. 


24  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1846 

Sabbath  Eve,  1846. 

My  dear  a.,  —  When  I  last  wrote  you  I  was  in 
Boston,  where  I  spent  a  delightful  visit  of  four  weeks. 
I  returned  home  about  the  middle  of  September  in 
very  good  health  and  spirits,  for  which  it  seems  to 
me  I  cannot  be  sufficiently  grateful  to  the  Giver  of 
all  mercies.  I  expected  to  go  into  the  Academy 
upon  my  return  home,  but  as  I  stayed  longer  than  I 
expected  to,  and  as  the  school  had  already  com- 
menced, I  made  up  my  mind  to  remain  at  home 
during  the  fall  term  and  pursue  my  studies  the  win- 
ter term,  which  commences  a  week  after  Thanksgiv- 
ing. I  kept  my  good  resolution  for  once  in  my  life, 
and  have  been  sewing,  practising  upon  the  piano, 
and  assisting  mother  in  household  affairs.  I  am 
anticipating  the  commencement  of  the  next  term 
with  a  great  deal  of  pleasure,  for  I  have  been  an 
exile  from  school  two  terms  on  account  of  my  health, 
and  you  know  what  it  is  to  Move  school.'  Miss 
Adams  is  with  us  now,  and  will  remain  through  the 
winter,  and  we  have  an  excellent  Principal  in  the 
person  of  Mr  Leonard  Humphrey,  who  was  the  last 
valedictorian.  We  now  have  a  fine  school.  I  thank 
you  a  thousand  times  for  your  long  and  affectionate 
letter.  ...  I  found  a  quantity  of  sewing  waiting 
with  open  arms  to  embrace  me,  or  rather  for  me 
to  embrace  it,  and  I  could  hardly  give  myself  up 
to  *  Nature's  sweet  restorer,*  for  the  ghosts  of  out- 
of-order  garments  crying  for  vengeance  upon  my 


\ 
^ 


1847]  TO  MRS  STRONG  2$ 

defenceless  head.  However,  I  am  happy  to  inform 
you,  my  dear  friend,  that  I  have  nearly  finished  my 
sewing  for  winter,  and  will  answer  all  the  letters 
which  you  shall  deem  worthy  to  send  so  naughty  a 
girl  as  myself,  at  short  notice.  .  .  . 
Write  soon.     Your  affectionate 


Emily  E.  D. 


[March  15,  1847.] 


Sabbath  Eve,  1847. 

Ever  dear  A., — .  .  .  We  have  spent  our  vacation 
of  a  fortnight,  and  school  has  commenced  again  since 
you  wrote  me.  I  go  this  term,  and  am  studying 
Algebra,  Euclid,  Ecclesiastical  History,  and  review- 
ing Arithmetic  again  to  be  upon  the  safe  side  of 
things  next  autumn.  We  have  a  delightful  school 
this  term  under  the  instruction  of  our  former  prin- 
cipals, and  Miss  R.  Woodbridge,  daughter  of  Rev. 
Dr  W.  of  Hadley,  for  preceptress.  We  all  love 
her  very  much.  Perhaps  a  slight  description  of 
her  might  be  interesting  to  my  dear  A.  She  is 
tall  and  rather  slender,  but  finely  proportioned, 
has  a  most  witching  pair  of  blue  eyes,  rich  brown 
hair,  delicate  complexion,  cheeks  which  vie  with  the 
opening  rose-bud,  teeth  like  pearls,  dimples  which 
come  and  go  like  the  ripples  in  yonder  little  merry 
brook,  and  then  she  is  so  affectionate  and  lovely. 
Forgive  my  glowing  description,  for  you  know  I  am 
always  in  love  with  my  teachers.     Yet,  much  as  we 


26  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1847 

love  her,  it  seems  lonely  and  strange  without  'our 
dear  Miss  Adams.'  I  suppose  you  know  that  she 
has  left  Amherst,  not  again  to  return  as  a  teacher. 
It  is  indeed  true  that  she  is  to  be  married.  Are  you 
not  astonished?  Nothing  was  known  but  that  she 
was  to  return  to  the  school,  until  a  few  days  before 
she  left  for  Syracuse,  where  she  has  gone  to  make  her 
'wedding  gear.*  She  is  to  be  married  the  first  of 
next  April,  to  a  very  respectable  lawyer  in  Conway, 
Massachusetts.  She  seemed  to  be  very  happy  in 
anticipation  of  her  future  prospects,  and  I  hope  she 
will  realize  all  her  fond  hopes.  I  cannot  bear  to 
think  that  she  will  never  more  wield  the  sceptre  and 
sit  upon  the  throne  in  our  venerable  schoolhouse, 
and  yet  I  am  glad  she  is  going  to  have  a  home  of 
her  own,  and  a  kind  companion  to  take  Hfe*s  journey 
with  her.  I  am  delighted  that  she  is  to  live  so  near 
us,  for  we  can  ride  up  and  see  her  often.  You  can- 
not imagine  how  much  I  enjoyed  your  description 
of  your  Christmas  fete  at  Miss  CampbelPs.  How 
magnificent  the  'Christmas  tree'  must  have  been, 
and  what  a  grand  time  you  must  have  had,  so  many 
of  you  I     Oh  ! ! 

I  had  a  great  many  presents,  Christmas  and  New 
Year's  hoUdays,  both,  but  we  had  no  such  celebra- 
tion of  the  former  which  you  describe.  .  .  .  Do  write 
me  soon — a  long  letter  —  and  tell  me  how  soon  you 
are  coming,  and  how  long  we  can  keep  you  when 
you  come.     Your  affectionate 

Emily  E.  Dickinson. 


i847]  TO  MRS  STRONG  2/ 


Mt  Holyoke  Seminary,  Nov.  6,  1847. 

My  dear  a.,  —  I  am  really  at  Mount  Holyoke 
Seminary,  and  this  is  to  be  my  home  for  a  long  year. 
Your  affectionate  letter  was  joyfully  received  and  I 
wish  that  this  might  make  you  as  happy  as  yours  did 
me.  It  has  been  nearly  six  weeks  since  I  left  home, 
and  that  is  a  longer  time  than  I  was  ever  &amp;way  from 
home  before  now.  I  was  very  homesick  for  a  few 
days,  and  it  seemed  to  me  I  could  not  live  here. 
But  I  am  now  contented  and  quite  happy,  if  I  can 
be  happy  when  absent  from  my  dear  home  and 
friends.  You  may  laugh  at  the  idea  that  I  cannot 
be  happy  when  away  from  home,  but  you  must 
remember  that  I  have  a  very  dear  home  and  that 
-this  is  my  first  trial  in  the  way  of  absence  for  any 
length  of  time  in  my  life.  As  you  desire  it,  I  will 
give  you  a  full  account  of  myself  since  I  first  left  the 
paternal  roof.  I  came  to  South  Hadley  six  weeks  ago 
next  Thursday.  I  was  much  fatigued  with  the  ride, 
and  had  a  severe  cold  besides,  which  prevented  me 
from  commencing  my  examinations  until  the  next 
day,  when  I  began.  I  finished  them  in  three  days, 
and  found  them  about  what  I  had  anticipated,  though 
the  old  scholars  say  they  are  more  strict  than  they 
ever  have  been  before.  As  you  can  easily  imagine, 
I  was  much  delighted  to  finish  without  failures,  and 
I  came  to  the  conclusion  then,  that  I  should  not  be 
at  all  homesick,  but  the  reaction  left  me  as  homesick 
a  girl  as  it  is  not  usual  to  see.     I  am  now  quite  con- 


28  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1847 

tented  and  am  very  much  occupied  in  reviewing  the 
Junior  studies,  as  I  wish  to  enter  the  middle  class. 
The  school  is  very  large,  and  though  quite  a  number 
have  left,  on  account  of  finding  the  examinations 
more  difficult  than  they  anticipated,  yet  there  are 
nearly  300  now.  Perhaps  you  know  that  Miss 
Lyon  is  raising  her  standard  of  scholarship  a  good 
deal,  on  account  of  the  number  of  applicants  this 
year,  and  she  makes  the  examinations  more  severe 
than  usual. 

You  cannot  imagine  how  trying  they  are,  because 
if  we  cannot  go  through  them  all  in  a  specified  time, 
we  are  sent  home.  1  cannot  be  too  thankful  that  I 
got  through  as  soon  as  I  did,  and  I  am  sure  that  I 
never  would  endure  the  suspense  which  I  endured 
during  those  three  days  again  for  all  the  treasures  of 
the  world. 

I  room  with  my  cousin  Emily,  who  is  a  Senior. 
She  is  an  excellent  room-mate,  and  does  all  in  her 
power  to  make  me  happy.  You  can  imagine  how 
pleasant  a  good  room-mate  is,  for  you  have  been 
away  to  school  so  much.  Everything  is  pleasant  and 
happy  here,  and  I  think  I  could  be  no  happier  at 
any  other  school  away  from  home.  Things  seem 
much  more  like  home  than  I  anticipated,  and  the 
teachers  are  all  very  kind  and  affectionate  to  us. 
They  call  on  us  frequently  and  urge  us  to  return 
their  calls,  and  when  we  do,  we  always  receive  a  cor- 
dial welcome  from  them.  I  will  tell  you  my  order 
of  time  for  the  day,  as  you  were  so  kind  as  to  give 


i847]  TO  MRS  STRONG  29 

me  yours.  At  6  o'clock  we  all  rise.  We  breakfast 
at  7.  Our  study  hours  begin  at  8.  At  9  we  all  meet 
in  Seminary  Hall  for  devotions.  At  10 J  I  recite  a 
review  of  Ancient  History,  in  connection  with  which 
we  read  Goldsmith  and  Grimshaw.  At  11,  I  recite 
a  lesson  in  Pope's  Essay  on  Man,  which  is  merely 
transposition.  At  12  I  practise  calisthenics,  and  at 
12  J  read  until  dinner,  which  is  at  12  J,  and  after 
djnner,  from  \\  until  2,  I  sing  in  Seminary  Hall. 
From  2 1  until  3I  I  practise  upon  the  piano.  At  3  J 
I  go  to  Sections,  where  we  give  in  all  our  accounts 
for  the  day,  including  absence,  tardiness,  communi- 
cations, breaking  silent  study  hours,  receiving  com- 
pany in  our  rooms,  and  ten  thousand  other  things 
which  I  will  not  take  time  or  place  to  mention.  At 
4i  we  go  into  Seminary  Hall  and  receive  advice  from 
Miss  Lyon  in  the  form  of  a  lecture.  We  have  supper 
at  6,  and  silent  study  hours  from  then  until  the  retir- 
ing bell,  which  rings  at  8f ,  but  the  tardy  bell  does 
not  ring  until  9f,  so  that  we  don*t  often  obey  the 
first  warning  to  retire.  Unless  we  have  a  good  and 
reasonable  excuse  for  failure  upon  any  of  the  items 
that  I  mentioned  above,  they  are  recorded  and  a 
black  mark  stands  against  our  names.  As  you  can 
easily  imagine,  we  do  not  like  very  well  to  get  'excep- 
tions,' as  they  are  called  scientifically  here. 

My  domestic  work  is  not  difficult  and  consists 
in  carrying  the  knives  from  the  first  tier  of  tables 
at  morning  and  noon,  and  at  night  washing  and 
wiping  the  same  quantity  of  knives.     I  am  quite 


30  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1847 

well  and  hope  to  be  able  to  spend  the  year  here, 
free  from  sickness.  You  have  probably  heard  many 
reports  of  the  food  here ;  and  if  so,  I  can  tell  you 
that  I  have  yet  seen  nothing  corresponding  to  my 
ideas  on  that  point  from  what  I  have  heard.  Every- 
thing is  wholesome  and  abundant  and  much  nicer 
than  I  should  imagine  could  be  provided  for  almost 
300  girls.  We  have  also  a  great  variety  upon  our 
tables  and  frequent  changes.  One  thing  is  certain, 
and  that  is,  that  Miss  Lyon  and  all  the  teachers 
seem  to  consult  our  comfort  and  happiness  in 
everything  they  do,  and  you  know  that  is  pleasant. 
When  I  left  home  I  did  not  think  I  should  find  a 
companion  or  a  dear  friend  in  all  the  multitude.  I 
expected  to  find  rough  and  uncultivated  manners, 
and,  to  be  sure,  I  have  found  some  of  that  stamp, 
but  on  the  whole,  there  is  an  ease  and  grace,  a  desire 
to  make  one  another  happy,  which  delights  and  at 
the  same  time  surprises  me  very  much.  I  find  no 
Abby  nor  Abiah  nor  Mary,  but  I  love  many  of  the 
girls.  Austin  came  to  see  me  when  I  had  been  here 
about  two  weeks,  and  brought  Viny  and  A.  I  need 
not  tell  you  how  delighted  I  was  to  see  them  all,  nor 
how  happy  it  made  me  to  hear  them  say  that  *they 
were  so  lonely,^  It  is  a  sweet  feeling  to  know  that 
you  are  missed  and  that  your  memory  is  precious  at 
home.  This  week,  on  Wednesday,  I  was  at  my  win- 
dow, when  I  happened  to  look  towards  the  hotel 
and  saw  father  and  mother,  walking  over  here  as 
dignified  as  you  please.     I  need  not  tell  you  that  I 


1848]  TO  MRS  STRONG  3 1 

danced  and  clapped  my  hands,  and  flew  to  meet 
them,  for  you  can  imagine  how  I  felt.  I  will  only 
ask  you,  do  you  love  your  parents?  They  wanted 
to  surprise  me,  and  for  that  reason  did  not  let  me 
know  they  were  coming.  I  could  not  bear  to  have 
them  go,  but  go  they  must,  and  so  I  submitted  in 
sadness.  Only  to  think  that  in  2^  weeks  I  shall  be 
at  my  own  dear  home  again.  You  will  probably  go 
home  at  Thanksgiving  time,  and  we  can  rejoice  with 
each  other. 

You  don't  [know]  how  I  laughed  at  your  descrip- 
tion of  your  introduction  to  Daniel  Webster,  and  I 
read  that  part  of  your  letter  to  cousin  Emily.  You 
must  feel  quite  proud  of  the  acquaintance,  and  will 
not,  I  hope,  be  vain  in  consequence.  However,  you 
don't  know  Governor  Briggs,  and  I  do,  so  you  are  no 
better  off  than  I.  .  .  .A.,  you  must  write  me  often, 
and  I  shall  write  you  as  often  as  I  have  time.  .  .  . 

From  your  affectionate 

Emily  E.  D. 

Mt  Holyoke  Female  Seminary,  Jan.  17, 1848. 

My  dear  a., — Your  welcome  epistle  found  me 
upon  the  eve  of  going  home,  and  it  is  needless  to 
say  very  happy.  We  all  went  home  on  Wednesday 
before  Thanksgiving,  and  a  stormy  day  it  was,  but 
the  storm  must  not  be  in  our  way,  so  we  tried  to 
make  the  best  of  it  and  look  as  cheerful  as  we 
could.  Many  of  the  girls  went  very  early  in  the 
morning  in  order  to  reach  home  the  same  day,  and 


32  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1848 

when  we  all  sat  do&gt;vn  to  the  breakfast  table^  it 
seemed  lonely  enough  to  see  so  many  places  vacant. 
After  breakfast,  as  we  were  not  required  to  keep  all 
the  family  rules,  a  number  of  us  met  together  at 
one  of  the  windows  in  the  Hall  to  watch  for  our 
friends,  whom  we  were  constantly  expecting.  No 
morning  of  my  life  ever  passed  so  slowly  to  me,  and 
it  really  seemed  to  me  they  never  were  coming,  so 
impatiently  did  I  wait  their  arrival.  At  last,  almost 
tired  out,  I  spied  a  carriage  in  the  distance,  and 
surely  Austin  was  in  it.  You,  who  have  been  away 
so  much,  can  easily  imagine  my  delight  and  will  not 
laugh,  when  I  tell  you  how  I  dashed  downstairs  and 
almost  frightened  my  dignified  brother  out  of  his 
senses.  All  was  ready  in  a  moment  or  less  than  a 
moment,  and  cousin  Emily  and  myself,  not  for- 
getting the  driver,  were  far  on  our  way  towards 
home.  The  rain  fell  in  torrents  and  the  wind 
howled  around  the  sides  of  the  mountain  over  our 
heads,  and  the  brooks  below,  filled  by  the  rain, 
rushed  along  their  pebbly  beds  almost  frightfully, 
yet  nothing  daunted,  we  rode  swiftly  along,  and 
soon  the  colleges  and  the  spire  of  our  venerable 
meeting-house  rose  to  my  delighted  vision. 

Never  did  Amherst  look  more  lovely  to  me,  and 
gratitude  rose  in  my  heart  to  God,  for  granting  me 
such  a  safe  return  to  my  own  dear  home.  Soon  the 
carriage  stopped  in  front  of  our  own  hpuse,  and  all 
were  at  the  door  to  welcome  the  returned  one,  from 
mother,  with  tears  in  her  eyes,  down  to  pussy,  who 


1848]  TO  MRS  STRONG  33 

tried  to  look  as  gracious  as  was  becoming  her  dignity. 
Oh,  A.,  it  was  the  first  meeting,  as  it  had  been  the 
first  separation,  and  it  was  a  joyful  one  to  all  of  us. 
The  storm  did  not  at  all  subside  that  night,  but  in 
the  morning  I  was  waked  by  the  glorious  sunshine 
[itj^self,  staring  full  in  my  face.  We  went  to  church 
in  the  morning  and  listened  to  an  excellent  sermon 
from  our  own  minister,  Mr  Colton.  At  noon  we 
returned  and  had  a  nice  dinner,  which,  you  well 
know,  cannot  be  dispensed  with  on  Thanksgiving 
day.  We  had  several  calls  in  the  afternoon,  and 
had  four  invitations  out  for  the  evening.  Of  course 
we  could  not  accept  them  all,  much  to  my  sorrow, 
but  decided  to  make  two  visits.  At  about  7  o'clock 
father,  mother,  Austin,  Viny,  cousin  Emily,  and  my- 
self to  bring  up  the  rear,  went  down  to  Professor 
Warner's,  where  we  spent  an  hour  delightfully  with 
a  few  friends,  and  then  bidding  them  good  eve,  we 
young  folks  went  down  to  Mrs  S.  M.*s,  accompanied 
by  sister  Mary,  There  was  quite  a  company  of 
young  people  assembled  when  we  arrived,  and  after 
we  had  played  many  games  we  had,  in  familiar  terms, 
a  *  candy  scrape.*  We  enjoyed  the  evening  much, 
and  returned  not  until  the  clock  pealed  out,  'Remem- 
ber ten  o'clock,  my  dear,  remember  ten  o'clock.' 
After  our  return,  father  wishing  to  hear  the  piano, 
I,  like  an  obedient  daughter,  played  and  sang  a  few 
tunes,  much  to  his  apparent  gratification.  We  then 
retired,  and  the  next  day  and  the  next  were  as  hap- 
pily spent  as  the.  eventful  Thanksgiving  day  itself. 

VOL.  I. —  3 


34  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1848 

-  -■ 

You  will  probably  think  me  foolish  thus  to  give 
you  an  inventory  of  my  time  while  at  home,  but  I 
did  enjoy  so  much  in  those  short  four  days  that 
I  wanted  you  to  know  and  enjoy  it  too.  Monday 
came  so  soon,  and  with  it  came  a  carriage  to  our 
door,  and  amidst  tears  falling  thick  and  fast  away  I 
went  again.  Slowly  and  sadly  dragged  a  few  of  the 
days  after  my  return  to  the  Seminary,  and  I  was  very 
homesick,  but  '  after  a  storm  there  comes  a  calm,' 
and  so  it  was  in  my  case.  My  sorrows  were  soon 
lost  in  study,  and  I  again  felt  happy,  if  happiness 
there  can  be  away  from  *  home,  sweet  home.* 

Our  term  closes  this  week  on  Thursday,  and  Fri- 
day I  hope  to  see  home  and  friends  once  more.  I 
have  studied  hard  this  term,  and  aside  from  my 
delight  at  going  home,  there  is  a  sweetness  in  ap- 
l)roaching  rest  to  me.  This  term  is  the  longest  in 
the  year,  and  I  would  not  wish  to  live  it  over  again, 
I  can  assure  you.  **.!  love  this  Seminary,  and  all  the 
teachers  are  bound  strongly  to  my  heart  by  ties  of 
affection.  There  are  many  sweet  girls  here,  and 
dearly  do  I  love  some  new  faces,  but  I  have  not 
yet  found  the  place  of  a/ra/  dear  ones  filled,  nor 
would  I  wish  it  to  be  here.  J  am  now  studying 
Silliman's  Chemistry  and  Cutter's  Physiology,  in  both 
of  which  I  am  much  interested.  We  finish  Physi- 
ology before  this  term  closes,  and  are  to  be  examined 
in  it  at  the  spring  examinations,  about  five  weeks 
after  the  commencement  of  the  next  term.  I 
already  begin  to  dread  that  time,  for  an  examination 


1848]  TO  MRS  STRONG  35 

in  Mount  Holyoke  Seminary  is  rather  more  public 
than  in  our  old  academy,  and  a  failure  would  be 
more  disgraceful  then,  I  opine ;  but  I  hope,  to  use 
my  father's  own  words,  'that  I  shall  not  disgrace 
myself.'  What'  are  you  studying  now  ?  You  did  not 
mention  that  item  in  your  last  letters  to  me,  and 
consequently  I  am  quite  in  the  dark  as  regards  your 
progress  in  those  affairs.  All  I  can  say  is,  that  I 
hope  you  will  not  leave  poor  me  far  behind.  .  .  . 

Your  affectionate  sister, 

Eagly  E.  Dickinson. 

P.  S.  Our  Section  have  commenced  reading  com- 
positions, and  we  read  once  in  a  month,  during 
which  time  we  write  two. 

Intellectual  brilliancy  of  an  individual  type  • 
was  already  at  seventeen  her  distinguishing 
characteristic,  and  nothing  of  the  recluse  was 
yet  apparent.  Traditions  of  extraordinary 
compositions  still  remain ;  and  it  is  certain 
that  each  was  an  epoch  for  those  who  heard, 
whether  teachers  or  pupils.  An  old  friend 
and  schoolmate  of  Emily  tells  me  that  she 
was  always  surrounded  by  a  group  of  girls  at 
recess,  to  hear  her  strange  and  intensely  funny 
stories,  invented  upon  the  spot. 


36  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1848 


Mt  Holyoke  Female  Seminary,  May  16, 1848. 

My  dear  a.,  —  You  must  forgive  me,  indeed  you 
must,  that  I  have  so  long  delayed  to  write  you,  and 
I  doubt  not  you  will  when  I  give  you  all  my  reasons 
for  so  doing.  You  know  it  is  customary  for  the  first 
page  to  be  occupied  with  apologies,  and  I  must  not 
depart  from  the  beaten  track  for  one  of  my  own 
imagining.  ...  I  had  not  been  very  well  all  winter, 
but  had  not  written  home  about  it,  lest  the  folks 
should  take  me  home.  During  the  week  following 
examinations,  a  friend  from  Amherst  came  over  and 
spent  a  week  with  me,  and  when  that  friend  returned 
home,  father  and  mother  were  duly  notified  of  the 
state  of  my  health.  Have  you  so  treacherous  a 
friend  ? 

Not  knowing  that  I  was  to  be  reported  at  home,  you 
can  imagine  my  amazement  and  consternation  when 
Saturday  of  the  same  week  Austin  arrived  in  full  sail, 
with  orders  from  head-quarters  to  bring  me  home 
at  all  events.  At  first  I  had  recourse  to  words,  and 
a  desperate  battle  with  those  weapons  was  waged 
for  a  few  moments,  between  my  Sophomore  brother 
and  myself.  Finding  words  of  no  avail,  I  next 
resorted  to  tears.  But  woman's  tears  are  of  little 
avail,  and  I  am  sure  mine  flowed  in  vain.  As  you 
can  imagine,  Austin  was  victorious,  and  poor,  de- 
feated I  was  led  off  in  triumph.  You  must  not 
imbibe  the  idea  from  what  I  have  said  that  I  do 
not  love  home  —  far  from  it.     But  I  could  not  bear 


1848]  TO  MRS  STRONG  37 

to  leave  teachers  and  companions  before  the  close 
of  the  term  and  go  home  to  be  dosed  and  receive 
the  physician  daily,  and  take  warm  drinks  and  be 
condoled  with  on  the  state  of  health  in  general  by 
all  the  old  ladies  in  town. 

Have  n't  I  given  a  ludicrous  account  of  going 
home  sick  from  a  boarding-school  ?  Father  is  quite 
a  hand  to  give  medicine,  especially  if  it  is  not 
desirable  to  the  patient,  and  I  was  dosed  for  about 
a  month  after  my  return  home,  without  any  mercy, 
till  at  last  out  of  mere  pity  my  cough  went  away,  and 
I  had  quite  a  season  of  peace.  Thus  I  remained 
at  home  imtil  the  close  of  the  term,  comforting  my 
parents  by  my  presence,  and  instilling  many  a  les- 
son of  wisdom  into  the  budding  intellect  of  my  only 
sister.  I  had  almost  forgotten  to  tell  you  that  I 
went  on  with  my  studies  at  home,  and  kept  up  with 
my  class.  Last  Thursday  our  vacation  closed,  and 
on  Friday  mom,  midst  the  weeping  of  friends,  crow- 
ing of  roosters,  and  singing  of  birds,  I  again  took 
my  departure  from  home.  Five  days  have  now 
passed  since  we  returned  to  Holyoke,  and  they 
have  passed  very  slowly.  Thoughts  of  home  and 
friends  'come  crowding  thick  and  fast,  like  light- 
nings from  the  mountain  cloud,*  and  it  seems  very 
desolate. 

Father  has  decided  not  to  send  me  to  Holyoke 
another  year,  so  this  is  my  last  term.  Can  it  be 
possible  that  I  have  been  here  almost  a  year?  It 
startles  me  when  I  really  think  of  the  advantages  I 


38  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [ig^S 

have  had,  and  I  fear  I  have  not  improved  them  as 
I  ought.  But  many  an  hour  has  fled  with  its  report 
to  heaven,  and  what  has  been  the  tale  of  me  ?  .  .  . 
How  glad  I  am  that  spring  has  come,  and  how  it 
calms  my  mind  when  wearied  with  study  to  walk  out 
in  the  green  fields  and  beside  the  pleasant  streams 
in  which  South  Hadley  is  rich  !  There  are  not  many 
wild  flowers  near,  for  the  girls  have  driven  them  to 
a  distance,  and  we  are  obliged  to  walk  quite  a  dis- 
tance to  find  them,  but  they  repay  us  by  their  sweet 
smiles  and  fragrance. 

The  older  I  grow,  the  more  do  I  love  spring  and 
spring  flowers.  Is  it  so  with  you  ?  While  at  home 
there  were  several  pleasure  parties  of  which  I  was 
a  member,  and  in  our  rambles  we  found  many  and 
beautiful  children  of  spring,  which  I  will  mention  \ 
and  see  if  you  have  found  them,  —  the  trailing  arbu-  / 
tus,  adder's  tongue,  yellow  violets,  Hver-leaf,  blood-? 
root,  and  many  other  smaller  flowers. 

What  are  you  reading  now?  I  have  little  time  to 
read  when  I  am  here,  but  while  at  home  I  had  a  feast 
in  the  reading  line,  I  can  assure  you.  Two  or  three 
of  them  I  will  mention:  Evangeline^  The  Princess f\ 
The  Maiden  Aunty  The  Epicurean^  and  The  Twins  ^ . 
and  Heart  by  Tupper,  complete  the  list.  Am  not 
I  a  pedant  for  telling  you  what  I  have  been  read- 
ing? Have  you  forgotten  your  visit  at  Amherst  last 
summer,  and  what  delightful  times  we  had  ?  I  have 
not,  and  I  hope  you  will  come  and  make  another 
and  a  longer,  when   I   get   home  from   Holyoke. 


1850]  TO  MRS  STRONG  39 

Father  wishes  to  have  me  at  home  a  year,  and  then 
he  will  probably  send  me  away  again,  where  I  know 
not.  •  .  . 

Ever  your  own  affectionate 

Emiue  E.  Dickinson. 

P.  S.  My  studies  for  this  series  are  Astronomy 
and  Rhetoric,  which  take  me  through  to  the  Senior 
studies.  What  are  you  studying  now,  if  you  are  in 
school,  and  do  you  attend  to  music?  I  practise 
only  one  hour  a  day  this  term. 

Although  nearly  two  years  elapse  between 
the  last  letter  and  the  following,  the  hand- 
writing is  quite  unaltered,  being  still  exceed- 
ingly small  and  clear,  and  averaging  twenty 
words  to  a  line. 

Amherst,  Jan.  29,  1850. 

Very  dear  A.,  —  The  folks  have  all  gone  away ; 
they  thought  that  they  left  me  alone,  and  contrived 
things  to  amuse  me  should  they  stay  long,  and  / 
be  lonely.  Lonely,  indeed,  —  they  did  n't  look,  and 
they  could  n*t  have  seen  if  they  had,  who  should 
bear  me  company.  Three  here,  instead  of  one, 
would  n't  it  scare  them  ?  A  curious  trio,  part 
earthly  and  part  spiritual  two  of  us,  the  other,  all 
heaven,  and  no  earth.  God  is  sitting  here,  looking 
into  my  very  soul  to  see  if  I  think  right  thoughts. 
Yet   I  am  not  afraid,    for  I  try  to  be  right    and 


40  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DlCICmSON  [1850 

good ;  and  He  knows  every  one  of  ray  straggles.  He  ' 
looks  very  gloriously,  and  everything  bright  seems  dull 
beside  Him ;  and  I  don't  dare  to  look  directly  at 
Him  for  fear  I  shall  die.  Then  you  are  here, 
dressed  in  that  quiet  black  gown  and  cap,  —  that 
funny  little  cap  I  used  to  laugh  at  you  about,  —  and 
you  don't  appear  to  be  thinking  about  anything 
in  particular,  —  not  in  one  of  your  breaking-dish 
moods,  I  take  it.  You  seem  aware  that  I  *m 
writing  you,  and  are  amused,  I  should  think,  at 
any  such  friendly  manifestation  when  you  are  al- 
ready present.  Success,  however,  even  in  making 
a  fool  of  myself,  is  n't  to  be  despised ;  so  I  shall 
persist  in  writing,  and  you  may  in  laughing  at  me,  — 
if  you  are  fully  aware  of  the  value  of  time  as  regards 
your  immortal  spirit.  I  can't  say  that  I  advise  you 
to  laugh;  but  if  you  are  punished,  and  I  warned 
you,  that  can  be  no  business  of  mine.  So  I  fold 
up  ray  arras,  and  leave  you  to  fate  —  may  it  deal 
very  kindly  with  you !  The  trinity  winds  up  with 
me,  as  you  may  have  surmised,  and  I  certainly 
would  n't  be  at  the  fag-end  but  for  civility  to  you. 
This  self-sacrificing  spirit  will  be  the  rain  of  me  ! 

I  am  occupied  principally  with  a  cold  just  now, 
and  the  dear  creature  will  have  so  much  attention 
that  my  time  slips  away  amazingly.  It  has  heard 
so  much  of  New  Englanders,  of  their  kind  atten- 
tions to  strangers,  that  it 's  come  all  the  way  from 
the  Alps  to  determine  the  trath  of  the  tale.  It  sa)rs 
the  half  was  n't  told  it,  and  I  begin  to  be  afraid  it 


1850]  TO  MRS  STRONG  41 

was  n't.  Only  think  —  came  all  the  way  from  that 
distant  Switzerland  to  find  what  was  the  truth !  Neither 
husband,  protector,  nor  friend  accompanied  it,  and 
so  utter  a  state  of  loneliness  gives  friends  if  nothing 
else.  You  are  dying  of  curiosity ;  let  me  arrange  that 
pillow  to  make  your  exit  easier.  I  stayed  at  home 
all  Saturday  afternoon,  and  treated  some  disagree- 
able people  who  insisted  upon  calling  here  as  toler- 
ably as  I  could ;  when  evening  shades  began  to  fall,  I 
turned  upon  my  heel,  and  walked.  Attracted  by 
the  gayety  visible  in  the  street,  I  still  kept  walking 
till  a  little  creature  pounced  upon  a  thin  shawl  I 
wore,  and  commenced  riding.  I  stopped,  and 
begged  the  creature  to  alight,  as  I  was  fatigued 
already,  and  quite  unable  to  assist  others.  It 
wouldn't  get  down,  and  commenced  talking  to 
itself:  'Can't  be  New  England  —  must  have  made 
some  mistake — disappointed  in  my  reception — don't 
agree  with  accounts.  Oh,  what  a  world  of  decep- 
tion and  fraud  !  Marm,  will  you  tell  me  the  name 
of  this  country  —  it's  Asia  Minor,  isn't  it?  I 
intended  to  stop  in  New  England.'  By  this  time 
I  was  so  completely  exhausted  that  I  made  no  fur- 
ther effort  to  rid  me  of  my  load,  and  travelled  home 
at  a  moderate  jog,  paying  no  attention  whatever  to 
it,  got  into  the  house,  threw  off  both  bonnet  and 
shawl,  and  out  flew  my  tormentor,  and  putting  both 
arms  around  my  neck,  began  to  kiss  me  immoder- 
ately, and  express  so  much  love  it  completely 
bewildered  me.     Since  then  it  has  slept  in  my  bed, 


42  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1850 

eaten  from  my  plate,  lived  with  me  everywhere, 
and  will  tag  me  through  life  for  all  I  know.  I 
think  I  *11  wake  first,  and  get  out  of  bed,  and  leave 
it  j  but  early  or  late,  it  is  dressed  before  me,  and 
sits  on  the  side  of  the  bed  looking  right  into  my 
face  with  such  a  comical  expression  it  almost  makes 
me  laugh  in  spite  of  myself.  I  can't  call  it  inter- 
esting, but  it  certainly  is  curious,  has  two  peculiar- 
ities which  would  quite  win  your  heart,  —  a  huge 
pocket-handkerchief  and  a  very  red  nose.  The 
first  seems  so  very  abundant^  it  gives  you  the  idea 
of  independence  and  prosperity  in  business.  The 
last  brings  up  the  '  jovial  bqwl,  my  boys,'  and  such 
an  association  *s  worth  the  having.  If  it  ever  gets 
tired  of  mey  I  will  forward  it  to  you  —  you  would 
love  it  for  my  sake,  if  not  for  its  own ;  it  will  tell 
you  some  queer  stories  about  me,  —  how  I  sneezed 
so  loud  one  night  that  the  family  thought  the  last 
trump  was  sounding,  and  climbed  into  the  currant- 
bushes  to  get  out  of  the  way ;  how  the  rest  of  the 
people,  arrayed  in  long  night-gowns,  folded  their 
arms,  and  were  waiting ;  but  this  is  a  wicked  story, 
—  it  can  tell  some  better  ones.  Now,  my  dear 
friend,  let  me  tell  you  that  these  last  thoughts  are 
fictions,  —  vain  imaginations  to  lead  astray  foolish 
young  women.  They  are  flowers  of  speech;  they 
both  make  and  tell  deliberate  falsehoods;  avoid 
them  as  the  snake,  and  turn  aside  as  from  the 
rattle-snake,  and  I  don't  think  you  will  be  harmed. 
Honestly,  though,  a  snake-bite  is  a  serious  matter. 


1850]  TO  MRS  STRONG  43 

and  there  can't  be  too  much  said  or  done  about 
it.  The  big  serpent  bites  the  deepest ;  and  we  get 
so  accustomed  to  its  bites  that  we  don't  mind 
about  them.  '  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  fear  him.^ 
Won't  you  read  some  work  upon  snakes  ?  —  I  have 
a  real  anxiety  for  you.  /  love  those  little  green 
ones  that  slide  around  by  your  shoes  in  the  grass, 
and  make  it  rustle  with  their  elbows;  they  are 
rather  my  favorites  on  the  whole ;  but  I  would  n't 
influence  you  for  the  world.  There  is  an  air  of 
misanthropy  about  the  striped  snake  that  will  com- 
mend itself  at  once  to  your  taste,  —  there  is  no 
monotony  about  it  —  but  we  will  more  of  this  again. 
Something  besides  severe  colds  and  serpents,  and 
we  will  try  to  find  that  something.  It  can't  be 
a  garden,  can  it?  or  a  strawberry-bed,  which  rather 
belongs  to  a  garden;  nor  it  can't  be  a  school- 
house,  nor  an  attomey-at-law.  Oh,  dear !  I  don't 
know  what  it  is.  Love  for  the  absent  don't  sound 
like  it ;  but  try  it,  and  see  how  it  goes. 

I  miss  you  very  much  indeed ;  think  of  you  at 
night  when  the  world  's  nodding,  nid,  nid,  nodding 
—  think  of  you  in  the  daytime  when  the  cares  of  the 
world,  and  its  toils,  and  its  continual  vexations 
choke  up  the  love  for  friends  in  some  of  our 
hearts ;  remember  your  warnings  sometimes  —  try 
to  do  as  you  told  me  sometimes  —  and  sometimes 
conclude  it 's  no  use  to  try ;  then  my  heart  says  it 
/&gt;,  and  new  trial  is  followed  by  disappointment 
again.     I  wondered,  when  you  had  gone,  why  we 


44  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1850 

did  n't  talk  more,  —  it  was  n't  for  want  of  a  subject ; 
it  never  could  de  for  that  Too  many,  perhaps,  — 
such  a  crowd  of  people  that  nobody  heard  the 
speaker,  and  all  went  away  discontented.  You 
astonished  me  in  the  outset,  perplexed  me  in  the 
continuance,  and  wound  up  in  a  grand  snarl  I 
shall  be  all  my  pilgrimage  unravelling.  Rather  a 
dismal  prospect  certainly;  but  'it's  always  the 
darkest  the  hour  before  day,'  and  this  earlier 
sunset  promises  an  earlier  rise  —  a  sun  in  splen- 
dor —  and  glory,  flying  out  of  its  purple  nest. 
Would  n't  you  love  to  see  God's  bird,  when  it  first 
tries  its  wings?  If  you  were  here  I  would  tell  you 
something — several  somethings — which  have  hap- 
pened since  you  went  away;  but  time  and  space, 
as  usual,  oppose  themselves,  and  I  put  my  treas- 
ures away  till  '  we  two  meet  again.'  The  hope 
that  I  shall  continue  in  love  towards  you,  and  vice 
versay  will  sustain  me  till  then.  If  you  are  think- 
ing soon  to  go  away,  and  to  show  your  face  no 
more,  just  inform  me,  will  you?  I  would  have  the 
'  long,  lingering  look,*  which  you  cast  behind,  —  it 
would  be  an  invaluable  addition  to  my  treasures, 
and  *  keep  your  memory  green.'  *  Lord,  keep 
all  our  memories  green,'  and  help  on  our  affection, 
and  tie  the  Mink  that  doth  us  bind'  in  a  tight 
bow-knot  that  will  keep  it  from  separation,  and  stop 
us  from  growing  old;  if  that  is  impossible,  make 
old  age    pleasant  to  us,  put   its   arms  around  us 


i8So]  TO  MRS  STRONG  45 

kindly,  and  when  we  go  home,  let  that  home  be 
called  heaven. 

Your  very  sincere  and  wicked  friend, 

Emily  E.  Dickinson. 

I  have  n*t  thanked  you  for  your  letter  yet,  but  not 
for  want  of  gratitude.  I  will  do  so  now  most  sin- 
cerely, most  heartily  —  gladly  and  gratefully.  You 
will  write  me  another  soon,  that  I  may  have  four 
right  feehngs  again !  They  don't  come  for  the 
asking.  I  have  been  introducing  you  to  me  in  this 
letter  so  far ;  we  will  traffic  in  '  joys  *  and  '  sor- 
rows '  some  other  day.  Colds  make  one  very 
carnal,  and  the  spirit  is  always  afraid  of  them.  You 
will  excuse  all  mistakes  in  view  of  ignorance;  all 
sin,  in  view  of  '  the  fall ;  *  all  want  of  friendly  affec- 
tion, in  the  sight  of  the  verse,  '  The  deepest  stream 
the  stillest  runs ; '  and  other  general  deficiencies,  on 
the  ground  of  universal  incapacity  !  Here  is  surely 
room  for  charity,  and  the  heavenly  visitor  would  n*t 
have  come  but  for  these  faults.  '  No  loss  without 
a  gain.'  I  called  to  see  your  cousins  an  evening 
since;  they  were  well,  and  evidently  delighted  to 
see  one  another  —  and  us. 

When  your  letter  came,  I  had  two  Western 
cousins  —  now  at  South  Hadley  Seminary  —  staying 
their  vacation  with  me.  They  took  an  unbounded 
delight  in  a  sentence  I  read  them ;  and  to  pay  for 
it,  send  you  their  love. 


46  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1850 

In  the  following  letter  appear  farther  traces 
of  the  later  and  almost  invariable  custom  of 
using  dashes,  instead  of  conventional  punctua- 
tion. These,  however,  will  not  be  given  gen- 
erally. In  printing  her  poems  it  was  found 
necessary  to  employ  usual  punctuation,  in  order 
that  the  meaning  should  be  more  easily  ap- 
prehended ;  and  in  the  letters  the  same  system, 
often  for  the  same  reason,  has  been  adopted. 

Amherst,  May  7,  1850. 

Dear  Remembered,  —  The  circumstances  under 
which  I  write  you  this  morning  are  at  once  glorious, 
afflicting,  and  beneficial,  —  glorious  in  ends^  afflict- 
ing in  means,  and  beneficial,  I  trust,  in  both.  Twin 
loaves  of  bread  have  just  been  bom  into  the  world 
under  my  auspices,  —  fine  children,  the  image  of 
their  mother;  and  here,  my  dear  friend,  is  the 
glory. 

On  the  lounge,  asleep,  lies  my  sick  mother,  suf- 
fering intensely  from  acute  neuralgia,  except  at  a 
moment  like  this,  when  kind  sleep  draws  near,  and 
beguiles  her,  —  here  is  the  affliction. 

I  need  not  draw  the  beneficial  inference,  —  the 
good  I  myself  derive,  the  winning  the  spirit  of 
patience,  the  genial  housekeeping  influence  stealing 
over  my  mind  and  soul,  —  you  know  all  these 
things  I  would  say,  and  will  seem  to  suppose  they 
are  written,  when  indeed  they  are  only  thought. 


1850]  TO  MRS  STRONG  47 

On  Sunday  my  mother  was  taken,  had  been  per- 
fectly well  before,  and  could  remember  no  possible 
imprudence  which  should  have  induced  the  dis- 
ease. Everything  has  been  done,  and  though  we 
think  her  gradually  throwing  it  off,  she  still  has 
much  suffering.  I  have  always  neglected  the  cu- 
linary arts,  but  attend  to  them  now  from  neces- 
sity, and  from  a  desire  to  make  everything  pleasant 
for  father  and  Austin.  Sickness  makes  desolation, 
and  the  day  is  dark  and  dreary;  but  health  will 
come  back,  I  hope,  and  light  hearts  and  smiling 
faces.  We  are  sick  hardly  ever  at  home,  and  don't 
know  what  to  do  when  it  comes,  —  wrinkle  our 
little  brows,  and  stamp  with  our  little  feet,  and 
our  tiny  souls  get  angry,  and  command  it  to  go 
away.  Mrs  Brown  will  be  glad  to  see  it,  —  old 
ladies  expect  to  die;  'as  for  us^  the  young  and 
active,  with  all  longings  "for  the  strife,'*  we  to 
perish  by  the  roadside,  weary  with  the  "  march  of 
life  "  —  no,  no,  my  dear  "  Father  Mortality,"  get 
out  of  the  way  if  you  please ;  we  will  call  if  we 
ever  want  you.  Good-morning,  sir !  ah,  good- 
morning  !  * 

When  I  am  not  at  work,  I  sit  by  the  side  of 
mother,  provide  for  her  little  wants,  and  try  to 
cheer  and  encourage  her.  I  ought  to  be  glad  and 
grateful  that  I  can  do  anything  now,  but  I  do  feel 
so  very  lonely,  and  so  anxious  to  have  her  cured. 
I  have  n't  repined  but  once,  and  you  shall  know 
all  the  why.    At  noon  ...  I  heard  a  well-known 


48  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1850 

rap,  and  a  friend  I  love  so  dearly  came  and  asked 
me  to  ride  in  the  woods,  the  sweet,  still  woods, 
—  and  I  wanted  to  exceedingly.  I  told  him  I 
could  not  go,  and  he  said  he  was  disappointed,  he 
wanted  me  very  much.  Then  the  tears  came 
into  my  eyes,  though  I  tried  to  choke  them  back, 
and  he  said  I  could  and  should  go,  and  it  seemed 
to  me  unjust.  Oh,  I  struggled  with  great  temp- 
tation, and  it  cost  me  much  of  denial ;  but  I  think 
in  the  end  I  conquered,  —  not  a  glorious  victory, 
where  you  hear  the  rolling  drum,  but  a  kind  of 
a  helpless  victory,  where  triumph  would  come  of 
itself,  faintest  music,  weary  soldiers,  nor  a  waving 
flag,  nor  a  long,  loud  shout.  I  had  read  of  Christ's 
temptations,  and  how  they  were  like  our  own,  only 
he  did  n't  sin ;  I  wondered  if  one  was  like  mine, 
and  whether  it  made  him  angry.  I  couldn't  make 
up  my  mind ;  do  you  think  he  ever  did  ? 

I  went  cheerfully  round  my  work,  humming  a 
little  air  till  mother  had  gone  to  sleep,  then  cried 
with  all  my  might  —  seemed  to  think  I  was  much 
abused  —  that  this  wicked  world  was  unworthy  such 
devoted  and  terrible  suffering  —  and  came  to  my 
various  senses  in  great  dudgeon  at  life,  and  time,  and 
love  for  affliction  and  anguish. 

What  shall  we  do,  my  darling,  when  trial  grows 
more  and  more,  when  the  dim,  lone  light  expires, 
and  it 's  dark,  so  very  dark,  and  we  wander,  and 
know  not  where,  and  cannot  get  out  of  the  for- 
est —  whose  is  the  hand  to  help  us,  and  to  lead, 


iSso]  TO  MRS  STRONG  49 

and   forever  guide   us;   they  talk    of  a  'Jesus  of 
Nazareth '  —  will  you  tell  me  if  it  be  he  ?  .  .  . 

It 's  Friday,  my  dear  A.,  and  that  in  another  week, 
yet  my  mission  is  unfulfilled  —  and  you  so  sadly 
neglected,  and  don't  know  the  reason  why.  Where 
do  you  think  I  Ve  strayed,  and  from  what  new 
errand  returned  ?  I  have  come  from  '  to  and  fro, 
and  walking  up  and  down '  the  same  place  that 
Satan  hailed  from,  when  God  asked  him  where 
he  'd  been ;  but  not  to  illustrate  further,  I  tell  you 
I  have  been  dreaming,  dreaming  a  golden  dream, 
with  eyes  all  the  while  wide  open,  and  I  guess  it 's 
almost  morning ;  and  besides,  I  have  been  at  work, 
providing  the  '  food  that  perisheth,*  scaring  the 
timorous  dust,  and  being  obedient  and  kind.  I  am 
yet  the  Queen  of  the  Court,  if  regalia  be  dust  and 
dirt,  have  three  loyal  subjects,  whom  I  *d  rather 
relieve  from  service.  Mother  is  still  an  invalid, 
though  a  partially  restored  one ;  father  and  Austin 
still  clamor  for  food ;  and  I,  like  a  martyr,  am  feed- 
ing them.  Would  n't  you  love  to  see  me  in  these 
bonds  of  great  despair,  looking  around  my  kitchen, 
and  praying  for  kind  deliverance,  and  declaring  by 
'  Omai's  beard  '  I  never  was  in  such  plight  ?  My 
kitchen,  I  think  I  called  it  —  God  forbid  that  it  . 
was,  or  shall  be,  my  own  —  God  keep  me  from  what  i 
they  call  households^  except  that  bright  one  of  \ 
'  faith ' ! 

Don't  be  afraid  of  my  imprecations  —  they  never 
did  any  one  harm,  and  they  make  me  feel  so  cool, 

VOL.  I. — 4 


50  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1851 

and  so  very  much  more  comfortable !  .  .  .  I 
presume  you  are  loving  your  mother,  and  loving 
the  stranger  and  wanderer  —  visiting  Ae  poor  and 
afflicted,  and  reaping  whole  fields  oFolessings  — 
save  me  a  little  sheaf,  only  a  very  little  one  !  Re- 
member and  care  for  me  sometimes,  and  scatter  a 
fragrant  flower  in  this  wilderness  life  of  mine  by 
writing  me,  and  by  not  forgetting,  and  by  lingering 
longer  in  prayer,  that  the  Father  may  bless  one  more  ! 

Your  affectionate  friend, 

Emily. 

Mr  Humphrey,  spoken  of  in  the  following 
letter,  is  the  same  friend  of  whom  Emily  had 
already  written  (page  24)  ;  he  graduated  from 
Amherst  as  valedictorian  in  1846,  being  subse- 
quently Principal  of  the  well-known  Amherst 
Academy,  and  still  later  a  theological  student 
at  Andover,  and  tutor  in  Amherst  College. 
His  sudden  death,  November  30,  1850,  caused 
much  grief  to  his  many  friends,  who  admired  his 
polished  scholarship  and  lovable  personality. 

[Amherst,  January  2,  1851.] 

Tuesday  Evening, 

I  write  A.  to-night,  because  it  is  cool  and  quiet, 
and  I  can  forget  the  toil  and  care  of  the  feverish 
day,  and  then  I  am  selfish  too,  because  I  am  feeling 
lonely ;  some  of  my  friends  are  gone,  and  some  of 
my  friends  are  sleeping  —  sleeping  the  churchyard 


1851]  TO  MRS  STRONG  5 1 

sleep — the  hour  of  evening  is  sad  —  it  was  once  my 
study  hour  —  my  master  has  gone  to  rest,  and  the 
open  leaf  of  the  book,  and  the  scholar  at  school 
alone^  make  the  tears  come,  and  I  cannot  brush 
them  away;  I  would  not  if  I  could,  for  they  are 
the  only  tribute  I  can  pay  the  departed  Humphrey. 

You  have  stood  by  the  grave  before ;  I  have  walked 
there  sweet  summer  evenings  and  read  the  names 
on  the  stones,  and  wondered  who  would  come  and 
give  me  the  same  memorial ;  but  I  never  have  laid 
my  friends  there,  and  forgot  that  they  too  must  die ; 
this  is  my  first  affliction,  and  indeed  *tis  hard  to 
bear  it.  To  those  bereaved  so  often  that  home  is 
no  more  here,  and  whose  communion  with  friends 
is  had  only  in  prayers,  there  must  be  much  to  hope 
for,  but  when  the  unreconciled  spirit  has  nothing  left 
but  God,  that  spirit  is  lone  indeed.  I  don't  think 
there  will  be  any  sunshine,  or  any  singing-birds  in 
the  spring  that  *s  coming.  ...  I  will  try  not  to  say 
any  more  —  my  rebellious  thoughts  are  many,  and 
the  friend  I  love  and  trust  in  has  much  now  to  for- 
give. I  wish  I  were  somebody  else  —  I  would  pray 
the  prayer  of  the  '  Pharisee,*  but  I  am  a  poor  little 
'Publican.'    'Son  of  David,*  look  down  on  me  ! 

'Twas  a  great  while  ago  when  you  wrote  me,  I 
remember  the  leaves  were  falling  —  and  now  there 
are  falling  snows ;  who  maketh  the  two  to  differ  — 
are  not  leaves  the  brethren  of  snows  ? 

Then  it  canH  be  a  great  while  since  then,  though 
I  verily  thought  it  was  ;  we  are  not  so  young  as  we 


52  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [185 1 

once  were,  and  time  seems  to  be  growing  long.  I 
dream  of  being  a  grandame,  and  banding  my  silver 
hairs,  and  I  seem  to  be  quite  submissive  to  the 
thought  of  growing  old ;  no  doubt  you  ride  rocking- 
horses  in  your  present  as  in  young  sleeps  —  quite 
a  pretty  contrast  indeed,  of  me  braiding  my  own 
gray  hairs,  and  my  friend  at  play  with  her  childhood, 
a  pair  of  decayed  old  ladies  !  Where  are  you,  my 
antique  friend,  or  my  very  dear  and  young  one  — 
just  as  you  please  to  please  —  it  may  seem  quite 
a  presumption  that  I  address  you  at  all,  knowing 
not  if  you  habit  here,  or  if  my  *bird  has  flown'  in 
which  world  her  wing  is  folded.  When  I  think  of 
the  friends  I  love,  and  the  little  while  we  may 
dwell  here,  and  then  '  we  go  away,*  I  have  a  yearn- 
ing feeling,  a  desire  eager  and  anxious  lest  any 
be  stolen  away,  so  that  I  cannot  behold  them.  I 
would  have  you  here,  all  here,  where  I  can  see  you, 
and  hear  you,  and  where  I  can  say  '  Oh,  no,*  if  the 
*  Son  of  Man  *  ever  '  cometh  * ! 

It  is  not  enough,  now  and  then&gt;  at  long  and  uncer- 
tain intervals  to  hear  you  *re  alive  and  well.  I  do  not 
care  for  the  body,  I  love  the  timid  soul,  the  blush- 
ing, shrinking  soul ;  it  hides,  for  it  is  afraid,  and  the 
bold,  obtrusive  body —  Pray,  marm,  did  you  call 
me  ?  We  are  very  small,  A.  —  I  think  we  grow  still 
smaller  —  this  tiny,  insect  life  the  portal  to  another ; 
it  seems  strange  —  strange  indeed.  I  'm  afraid  we 
are  jail  unworthy,  yet  we  shall '  enter  in.' 

I  can  think  of  no  other  way  than  for  you,  my  dear 


1851]  TO  MRS  STRONG  53 

girl,  to  come  here — we  are  growing  away  from  each 
other,  and  talk  even  now  like  strangers.  To  forget 
the  'memn  and  teum,*  dearest  friends  must  meet 
sometimes,  and  then  comes  the  *  bond  of  the  spirit ' 
which,  if  I  am  correct,  is  *  unity.' 

.  .  .  You  are  growing  wiser  than  I  am,  and  nip- 
ping in  the  bud  fancies  which  I  let  blossom  —  per- 
chance to  bear  no  fruit,  or  if  plucked,  I  may  find  it 
bitter.  The  shore  is  safer,  A.,  but  I  love  to  buffet 
the  sea  —  I  can  count  the  bitter  wrecks  here  in  these 
pleasant  waters,  and  hear  the  murmuring  winds,  but 
oh,  I  love  the  danger !  You  are  learning  control  and 
firmness.  Christ  Jesus  will  love  you  more.  I  'm 
afraid  he  don't  love  me  any  /  .  .  .  Write  when  you 
willy  my  friend,  and  forget  all  amiss  herein,  for  as 
these  few  imperfect  words  to  the  full  communion 
of  spirits,  so  this  small  giddy  life  to  the  better^  the 
life  eternal,  and  that  we  may  live  this  life,  and  be 
filled  with  this  true  communion,  I  shall  not  cease  to 
pray.  E. 

[August,  1851.] 

Tuesday  Evening. 

*  Yet  a  little  while  I  am  with  you,  and  again  a  lit- 
tle while  and  I  am  not  with  you,'  because  you  go  to 
your  mother !  .  .  .  But  the  virtue  of  the  text  con-^ 
sists  in  this,  my  dear,  that  '  if  I  go^  I  come  again, 
and  ye  shall  be  with  me  where  I  am ; '  that  is  to  say, 
that  if  you  come  in  November,  you  shall  be  mine, 
and  I  shall  be  thine,  and  so  on,  vice  versa,  until  ad 


54  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1851 

infinitum^  which  is  n't  a  great  way  off.  While  I 
think  of  it,  my  dear  friend,  and  we  are  upon  these 
subjects,  allow  me  to  remark  that  you  have  the  fun- 
niest manner  of  popping  into  town,  and  the  most 
lamentable  manner  of  popping  out  again,  of  any 
one  I  know.  It  really  becomes  to  me  a  matter  of 
serious  moment,  this  propensity  of  yours  concerning 
your  female  friends  —  the  'morning  cloud  and  the 
early  dew '  are  not  more  evanescent. 

I  think  it  was  Tuesday  evening  that  we  were  so 
amused  by  the  oratorical  feats  of  three  or  four  young 
gentlemen.  I  remember  I  sat  by  you  and  took 
great  satisfaction  in  such  seat  and  society — I  re- 
member further  our  mutual  good-nights,  our  prom- 
ises to  meet  again,  to  tell  each  other  tales  of  our 
own  heart  and  life,  to  seek  and  find  each  other  after 
so  long  a  time  of  distant  separation.  I  can  hardly 
realize  that  these  are  recollections,  that  our  happy 
to-day  joins  the  great  band  of  yesterdays  and  marches 
on  to  the  dead  —  too  quickly  flown,  my  bird,  for 
me  to  satisfy  me  that  you  did  sit  and  sing  beneath 
my  chamber  window  1  I  only  went  out  once  after 
the  time  I  saw  you  —  the  morning  of  Mr  Beecher  I 
looked  for  you  in  vain.  I  discovered  your  Palmer 
cousins,  but  if  you  indeed  were  there,  it  must  have 
been  in  a  form  to  my  gross  sense  impalpable.  I 
was  disappointed.  I  had  been  hoping  much  a  little 
visit  from  you;  when  will  the  hour  be  that  we 
shall  sit  together  and  talk  of  what  we  were  and  what 
we  are  and  may  be  —  with  the  shutters  closed,  dear 


1851]  TO  MRS  STRONG  55 

A.,  and  the  balmiest  little  breeze  stealing  in  at  the 
window?  I  love  those  little  fancies,  yet  I  would 
love  them  more  were  they  not  quite  so  fanciful  as 
they  have  seemed  to  be.  I  have  fancied  so  many 
times,  and  so  many  times  gone  home  to  find  it  was 
only  fancy,  that  I  am  half  afraid  to  hope  for  what  I 
long  for.  It  would  seem,  my  dear  A.,  that  out  of 
all  the  moments  crowding  this  little  world,  a  few 
might  be  vouchsafed  to  spend  with  those  we  love  — 
a  separated  hour,  an  hour  more  pure  and  true  than 
ordinary  hours,  when  we  could  pause  a  moment, 
before  we  journey  on.  We  had  a  pleasant  time  talk- 
ing the  other  morning  —  had  I  known  it  was  all 
my  portion,  mayhap  I  'd  improved  it  more,  but  it 
never  41  come  back  again  to  try,  whether  or  no. 
Don't  you  think  sometimes  these  brief,  imperfect 
meetings  have  a  tale  to  tell  —  perhaps  but  for  the 
sorrow  which  accompanies  them  we  should  not  be 
reminded  of  brevity  and  change,  and  should  build 
the  dwelling  earthward  whose  site  is  in  the  skies  — 
perhaps  the  treasure  here  would  be  too  dear  a  treas- 
ure couldn't  'the  moth  corrupt,  and  the  thief  break 
through  and  steal ; '  and  this  makes  me  think  how 
I  found  a  little  moth  in  my  stores  the  other  day, 
a  very  subtle  moth  that  had,  in  ways  and  man- 
ners to  me  and  mine  unknown,  contrived  to  hide 
itself  in  a  favorite  worsted  basket  —  how  long  my 
little  treasure-house  had  furnished  an  arena  for  its 
destroying  labors  it  is  not  mine  to  tell;  it  had  an 
errand   there  —  I  trust  it  fulfilled  its  mission ;   it 


56  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1851 

taught  me,  dear  A.,  to  have  no  treasure  here,  or 
rather  it  tried  to  tell  me  in  its  little  mothy  way  of 
another  enduring  treasure  the  robber  cannot  steal, 
nor  time  waste  away.  How  many  a  lesson  learned 
from  lips  of  such  tiny  teachers  —  don't  it  make  you 
think  of  the  Bible,  'not  many  mighty,  nor  wise  *? 

You  met  our  dear  Sarah  T.  after  I  saw  you  here. 
Her  sweet  face  is  the  same  as  in  those  happy 
school-days  —  and  in  vain  I  search  for  wrinkles 
brought  on  by  many  cares ;  we  all  love  Sarah  dearly, 
and  shall  try  to  do  all  in  our  power  to  make  her  visit 
happy.  Isn't  it  very  remarkable  that  in  so  many 
years  Sarah  has  changed  so  little  —  not  that  she  has 
stood  still,  but  has  made  snch  peaceful  progress — her 
thoughts,  though  they  are  older,  have  all  the  charm 
of  youth —  have  not  yet  lost  their  freshness,  their  in- 
nocence and  peace ;  she  seems  so  pure  in  heart,  so 
sunny  and  serene,  like  some  sweet  lark  or  robin, 
ever  soaring  and  singing.  I  have  not  seen  her  much 
— I  want  to  see  her  more — she  speaks  often  of  you, 
and  with  a  warm  affection.  I  hope  no  change  or 
time  shall  blight  those  loves  of  ours,  I  would  bear 
them  all  in  my  arms  to  my  home  in  the  glorious 
heaven  and  say,  *  Here  am  I,  my  Father,  and  those 
whom  thou  hast  given  me.'  If  the  life  which  is  to 
come  is  better  than  dwelling  here,  and  angels  are 
there  and  our  friends  are  glorified  and  are  singing 
there  and  praising  there,  need  we  fear  to  go  when 
spirits  beyond  wait  for  us  ?  I  was  meaning  .to  see 
you  more  and  talk  about  such  things  with  you—     I 


1852]  TO  MRS  STRONG  57 

want  to  know  your  views  and  your  eternal  feelings 
— how  things  beyond  are  to  you — oh,  there  is  much 
to  speak  of  in  meeting  one  you  love,  and  it  always 
seems  to  me  that  I  might  have  spoken  more,  and  I 
almost  always  think  that  what  we  found  to  say  might 
have  been  left  unspoken. 

Shall  it  always  be  so,  A.  ?  Is  there  no  longer  day 
given  for  our  communion  with  the  spirits  of  our 
love?  Writing  is  brief  and  fleeting — conversation 
will  come  again,  yet  if  it  «////,  it  hastes  and  must 
be  on  its  way.     Earth  is  short,  but  Paradise  is  long 

—  there  must  be  many  moments  in  an  eternal  day ; 

then  sometime  we  shall  tarry  while  time  and  tide  roll 

on,  and  till  then  vale. 

Your  own  dear 

Emilie. 

[Written  from  Amherst  between  January  i,  and  the  middle  of 

June,  1852.J 

Sunday  Evening, 

My  very  dear  A.,  —  I  love  to  sit  here  alone, 
writing  a  letter  to  you,  and  whether  your  joy  in 
reading  will  amount  to  as  much  or  more,  or  even 
less  than  mine  in  penning  it  to  you,  becomes  to  me 
just  now  a  very  important  problem  —  and  I  will 
tax  each  power  to  solve  the  same  for  me ;  if  as 
happy,  indeed,  I  have  every  occasion  for  gratitude 

—  more  so,  my  absent  friend,  I  may  not  hope  to 
make  you,  but  I  do  hope  most  earnestly  it  may  not 
give  you  less.     Oh,  I  do  know  it  will  not,  if  school- 


58  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1852 

day  hearts  are  warm  and  school-day  memories  pre- 
cious !  As  I  told  you,  it  is  Sunday  to-day,  so  I  find 
myself  quite  curtailed  in  the  selection  of  subjects, 
being  myself  quite  vain,  and  naturally  adverting  to 
many  worldly  things  which  would  doubtless  grieve 
and  distress  you :  much  more  will  I  be  restrained  by 
the  fact  that  such  stormy  Sundays  L  always  remain 
at  home,  and  have  not  those  opportunities  for  hoard- 
ing up  great  truths  which  I  would  have  otherwise. 
In  view  of  these  things.  A.,  your  kind  heart  will  be 
lenient,  forgiving  all  empty  words  and  unsatisfying 
feelings  on  the  Sabbath-day  ground  which  we  have 
just  alluded  to.  I  rejoice  in  one  theme  appropriate 
to  every  place  and  time  —  indeed  it  cannot  intrude 
in  the  hour  most  unseemly  for  every  other  thought 
and  every  other  feeling ;  and  sure  I  am  to-day,  how- 
e'er  it  may  be  holy,  I  shall  not  break  or  reproach 
by  speaking  of  the  links  which  bind  us  to  each 
other,  and  make  the  very  thought  of  you,  and  time 
when  I  last  saw  you,  a  sacred  thing  to  me.  And 
I  have  many  memories,  and  many  thoughts  beside, 
which  by  some  strange  entwining,  circle  you  round 
and  round ;  if  you  please,  a  vine  of  fancies,  towards 
which  dear  A.  sustains  the  part  of  oak,  and  as  up 
each  sturdy  branch  there  climbs  a  little  tendril  so 
full  of  faith  and  confidence  and  the  most  holy  trust, 
so  let  the  hearts  do  also,  of  the  dear  '  estray ;  *  then 
the  farther  we  may  be  from  home  and  from  each 
other,  the  nearer  by  that  faith  which  '  overcometh 
all  things  *  and  bringeth  us  to  itself. 


i8s2]  TO  MRS  STRONG  59 

Amherst  and  Philadelphia,  separate  indeed,  and 
yet  how  near,  bridged  by  a  thousand  trusts  and  a 
'thousand  times  ten  thousand'  .the  travellers  who 
cross,  whom  you  and  I  may  not  see,  nor  hear  the 
trip  of  their  feet,  yet  faith  tells  us  they  are  there, 
ever  crossing  and  re-crossing.  Very  likely.  A.,  you 
fancy  me  at  home  in  my  own  little  chamber,  writing 
you  a  letter,  but  you  are  greatly  mistaken.  I  am 
on  the  blue  Susquehanna  paddling  down  to  you ;  I 
am  not  much  of  a  sailor,  so  I  get  along  rather  slowly, 
and  I  am  not  much  of  a  mermaid,  though  I  verily 
think  I  shall  be,  if  the  tide  overtakes  me  at  my 
present  jog.  Hard-hearted  girl !  I  don't  believe 
you  care,  if  you  did  you  would  come  quickly  and 
help  me  out  of  this  sea ;  but  if  I  drown.  A.,  and  go 
down  to  dwell  in  the  seaweed  forever  and  forever, 
I  will  not  forget  your  name,  nor  all  the  wrong  you 
did  me  ! 

Why  did  you  go  away  and  not  come  to  see  me? 
I  felt  so  sure  you  would  come,  because  you  prom- 
ised me,  that  I  watched  and  waited  for  you,  and 
bestowed  a  tear  or  two  upon  my  absentee.  How 
very  sad  it  is  to  have  a  confiding  nature,  one's  hopes 
and  feelings  are  quite  at  the  mercy  of  all  who  come 
along ;  and  how  very  desirable  to  be  a  stolid  indi- 
vidual, whose  hopes  and  aspirations  are  safe  in 
one's  waistcoat  pocket,  and  that  a.  pocket  indeed, 
and  one  not  to  be  picked ! 

Notwithstanding  your  faithlessness  I  should  have 
come  to  see  you,  but  for  that  furious  snow-storm ; 


6o  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1852 

I  did  attempt  in  spite  of  it,  but  it  conquered  in 

spite  of  me,  and  I  doffed  my  hood  and  shawl,  and 

felt  very  crestfallen  the  remainder  of  the  day.     I 

did  want  one  more  kiss,  one  sweet  and  sad  good-by, 

before  you  had  flown  away ;  perhaps,  my  dear  A., 

it  is  well  that  I  go  without  it ;  it  might  have  added 

anguish  to  our  long  separation,  or  made  the  miles 

still  longer  which  keep  a  friend  away.     I  always  try 

to  think  in  any  disappointment  that  had  I   been 

gratified,  it  had  been  sadder  still,  and  I  weave  from 

such  supposition,  at  timeSy  considerable  consolation ; 

consolation  upside  down  as  I  am  pleased  to  call  it. 

.  .  .  Shall  I  have  a  letter  soon  —  oh,  may  I  very 

soon,  for  *  some  days  are  dark  and  dreary,  and  the 

wind  is  never  weary.  * 

Emily  E. 

[Also  written  before  the  middle  of  June,  1852.] 

Sabbath  Day, 

I  love  to  link  you,  A.  and  E.,  I  love  to  put  you 
together  and  look  at  you  side  by  side — the  pic- 
ture pleases  me,  and  I  should  love  to  watch  it  until 
the  sun  goes  down,  did  I  not  call  to  mind  a  very 
precious  letter  for  which  I  have  not  as  yet  rendered 
a  single  farthing,  so  let  me  thank  you  that  midst 
your  many  friends  and  cares  and  influenzas,  you  yet 
found  time  for  me,  and  loved  me.  You  remarked 
that  I  had  written  you  more  affectionately  than  wont 
—  I  have  thought  that  word  over  and  over,  and  it 
puzzles  me  now;  whether  our  few  last  years  have 
been  cooler  than  our  first  ones,  or  whether  I  write 


1852]  TO  MRS  STRONG  6 1 

indifferently  when  I  truly  know  it  not,  the  query 
troubles  me.  I  do  believe  sincerely,  that  the  friend- 
ship formed  at  school  was  no  warmer  than  now,  nay 
more,  that  this  is  warmest  —  they  differ  indeed  to 
me  as  morning  differs  from  noon  —  one  may  be 
fresher,  cheerier,  but  the  other  fails  not. 

You  and  I  have  grown  older  since  school-days, 
and  our  years  have  made  us  soberer  —  I  mean  have 
made  me  so,  for  you  were  always  dignified,  e*en 
when  a  little  girl,  and  /  used,  now  and  then,  to 
cut  a  timid  caper.  That  makes  me  think  of  you 
the  very  first  time  I  saw  you,  and  I  can't  repress 
a  smile,  not  to  say  a  hearty  laugh,  at  your  little 
girl  expense.  I  have  roused  your  curiosity,  so  I 
will  e'en  tell  you  that  one  Wednesday  afternoon, 
in  the  days  of  that  dear  old  Academy,  I  went  in 
to  be  entertained  by  the  rhetoric  of  the  gentlemen 
and  the  milder  form  of  the  girls —  I  had  hardly 
recovered  myself  from  the  dismay  attendant  upon 
entering  august  assemblies,  when  with  the  utmost 
equanimity  you  ascended  the  stairs,  bedecked  with 
dandelions,  arranged,  it  seemed,  for  curls.  I  shall 
never  forget  that  scene,  if  I  live  to  have  gray  hairs, 
nor  the  very  remarkable  fancies  it  gave  me  then  of 
you,  and  it  comes  over  me  now  with  the  strangest 
bygone  funniness,  and  I  laugh  merrily.  Oh,  A., 
you  and  the  early  flower  are  forever  linked  to  me ; 
as  soon  as  the  first  green  grass  comes,  up  firom  a 
chink  in  the  stones  peeps  the  little  flower,  precious 
Meontodon,*  and  my  heart  fills  toward  you  with  a 


62  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON         [1852 


warm  and  childlike  fulness  !  Nor  do  I  laugh  now ; 
far  from  it,  I  rather  bless  the  flower  which  sweetly, 
slyly  too,  makes  me  come  nearer  you. 

But,  my  dear,  I  can't  give  the  dandelion  the  privi- 
lege due  to  you,  so  good-by,  little  one  ! 

I  would  love  to  see  you.  A.,  I  would  rather  than 
write  to  you,  might  I  with  equal  ease,  for  the 
weather  is  very  warm,  and  my  head  aches  a  little, 
and  my  heart  a  little  more,  so  taking  me  collectively , 
I  seem  quite  miserable,  but  I  '11  give  you  the  sunny 
corners,  and  you  must  n't  look  at  the  shade.  You 
were  happy  when  you  wrote  me ;  I  hope  so  now, 
though  I  would  you  were  in  the  country,  and  could 
reach  the  hills  and  fields.  I  can  reach  them,  carry 
them  home,  which  I  do  in  my  arms  daily,  and  when  / 
they  drop  and  fade,  I  have  only  to  gather  fresh  [ 
ones.  Your  joy  would  indeed  be  full,  could  you  \ 
sit  as  I,  at  my  window,  and  hear  the  boundless  birds, 
and  every  little  while  feel  the  breath  of  some  new 
flower !  Oh,  do  you  love  the  spring,  and  is  n't  it 
brothers  and  sisters,  and  blessed,  ministering  spirits 
unto  you  and  me,  and  us  all  ? 

I  often  see  A.  —  oftener  than  at  sometimes  when 
friendship  drooped  a  little.  Did  you  ever  know 
that  a  flower,  once  withered  and  freshened  again, 
became  an  immortal  flower,  —  that  is,  that  it  rises 
again?  I  think  resurrections  here  are  sweeter,  it 
may  be,  than  the  longer  and  lasting  one  —  for  you 
expect  the  one,  and  only  hope  for  the  other.  .  •  ,3^ 
I  will  show  you  the  sunset  if  you  will  sit  by  me,  but 


1853]  TO  MRS  STRONG  63 

I  cannot  bring  it  there,  for  so  much  gold  is  heavy. 
Can  you  see  it  in  Philadelphia  ? 

A  rather  long  interval  seems  to  have  elapsed 
between  the  preceding  letter  and  the  next, 
which  was  written  about  July  26,  probably 
of  1853.  The  hand-writing  is  quite  different 
from  the  earlier  letters,  more  resembling  that 
middle  period  of  which  an  illustration  is  given 
(page  218),  yet  still  somewhat  smaller. 

The  delicate  and  sunshiny  sarcasm  in  this 
note  may  be  the  more  fully  appreciated  by 
recalling  that  Emily  Dickinson  was  not  yet 
twenty-two  years  old. 

Tuesday  Evening. 

My  dear  Child,  —  Thank  you  for  that  sweet  note 
which  came  so  long  ago,  and  thank  you  for  asking 
me  to  come  and  visit  you,  and  thank  you  for  loving 
me,  long  ago,  and  to-day,  and  too  for  all  the  sweet- 
ness, and  all  the  gentleness,  and  all  the  tenderness 
with  which  you  remember  me,  —  your  quaint,  old- 
fashioned  friend. 

I  wanted  very  much  to  write  you  sooner,  and  I 
tried  frequently,  but  till  now  in  vain,  and  as  I  write 
to-night,  it  is  with  haste,  and  fear  lest  something  still 
detain  me.  You  know,  my  dear  A.,  that  the  sum- 
mer has  been  warm,  that  at  this  pleasant  season 
we  have  much  company,  that  this  irresolute  body 
refuses  to  serve  sometimes,  and  the  indignant  tenant 
can  only  hold  its  peace,  —  all  this  you  know,  for  I 


64  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1853 

have  often  told  you,  and  yet  I  say  it  again,  if  may- 
hap it  persuades  you  that  I  do  love  you  indeed,  and 
have  not  done  neglectfully.  ...  I  think  it  was  in 
June  that  your  note  reached  here,  and  I  did  snatch 
a  moment  to  call  upon  your  friend.  Yet  I  went  in 
the  dusk,  and  it  was  Saturday  evening,  so  even  then, 
A.,  you  see  how  cares  pursued  me.  I  found  her 
very  lovely  in  what  she  said  to  me,  and  I  fancied  in 
her  face  so,  although  the  gentle  dusk  would  draw 
her  curtain  close,  and  I  did  n*t  see  her  clearly.  We 
talked  the  most  of  you,  —  a  theme  we  surely  loved, 
or  we  had  not  discussed  it  in  preference  to  all.  I 
would  love  to  meet  her  again,  and  give  my  love  to 
her,  for  your  sake.  You  asked  me  to  come  and  see 
you  —  I  must  speak  of  that.  I  thank  you,  A.,  but 
I  don't  go  from  home,  unless  emergency  leads  me 
by  the  hand,  and  then  I  do  it  obstinately,  and  draw 
back  if  I  can.  Should  I  ever  leave  home,  which  is 
improbable,  I  will,  with  much  delight,  accept  your 
invitation ;  till  then,  my  dear  A.,  my  warmest  thanks 
are  yours,  but  don't  expect  me.  I  'm  so  old-fash- 
ioned, darling,  that  all  your  friends  would  stare.  I  j 
should  have  to  bring  my  work-bag,  and  my  big  { 
spectacles,  and  I  half  forgot  my  grandchildren,  and  j 
my  pincushion,  and  puss  —  why,  think  of  it  seri- 
ously, A.,  —  do  you  think  it  my  duty  to  leave  ?  Will 
you  write  me  again?  Mother  and  Vinnie  send  their 
love,  and  here  's  a  kiss  from  me. 

Good-night,  from 

Emily. 


CHAPTER  II 
To  Mr  William  Austin  Dickinson 

THE  following  letters  were  written  to 
Emily  Dickinson's  brother  between  the 
years  1847  and  1854,  the  earlier  ones  being 
sent  from  South  Hadley,  while  he  was  a  student 
in  Amherst  College.  Later  ones  were  written 
at  Amherst,  and  sent  to  Boston,  where  he  had 
charge  of  a  school  after  graduation,  1851  and 
1852;  while  the  latest  were  addressed  to  Cam- 
bridge during  her  brother's  studies  at  the 
Harvard  Law  School,  1853  and  1854.  Dur- 
ing these  last  two  years  their  father,  the 
Hon.  Edward  Dickinson,  was  in  Congress  at 
Washington. 

*        [South  Hadley,  Autumn,  1847.] 

Thursday  Noon. 

My  dear  Brother  Austin,  —  I  have  not  really 
a  moment  of  time  in  which  to  write  you,  and  am 
taking  time  from  '  silent  study  hours ; '  but  I  am 
determined  not  to  break  my  promise  again,  and  I 
generally  carry  my  resolutions  into  effect.  I  watched 
you  until  you  were  out  of  sight  Saturday  evening, 

VOL.  I.  —  5 


66  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1847 

and  then  went  to  my  room  and  looked  over  my 
treasures;  and  surely  no  miser  ever  counted  his 
heaps  of  gold  with  more  satisfaction  than  I  gazed 
upon  the  presents  from  home.  .  .  . 

I  can't  tell  you  now  how  much  good  your  visit  did 
me.  My  spirits  have  wonderfully  lightened  since 
then.  I  had  a  great  mind  to  be  homesick  after  you 
went  home,  but  I  concluded  not  to,  and  therefore 
gave  up  all  homesick  feelings.  Was  not  that  a  wise 
determination?  .  .  . 

There  has  been  a  menagerie  here  this  week. 
Miss  Lyon  provided  *  Daddy  Hawks  *  as  a  beau 
for  all  the  Seminary  girls  who  wished  to  see  the 
bears  and  monkeys,  and  your  sister,  not  caring  to 
go,  was  obliged  to  decline  the  gallantry  of  said 
gentleman,  —  which  I  fear  I  may  never  have  an- 
other opportunity  to  avail  myself  of.  The  whole 
company  stopped  in  front  of  the  Seminary  and 
played  for  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  for  the  pur- 
pose of  getting- custom  in  the  afternoon,  I  opine. 
Almost  all  the  girls  went ;  and  I  enjoyed  the  solitude 
finely. 

I  want  to  know  when  you  are  coming  to  see  me 
again,  for  I  want  to  see  you  as  much  as  I  did  before. 
I  went  to  see  Miss  F.  in  her  room  yesterday.  .  .  . 
I  love  her  very  much,  and  think  I  shall  love  all  the 
teachers  when  I  become  better  acquainted  with 
them  and  find  out  their  ways,  which,  I  can  assure 
you,  are  almost '  past  finding  out.' 

I   had  almost  forgotten  to  tell  you  of  a  dream 


1847]     TO  MR  WILLIAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON        6/ 

which  I  dreamed  last  night,  and  I  would  Hke  to 
have  you  turn  Daniel  and  interpret  it  to  me ;  or  if  you 
don't  care  about  going  through  all  the  perils  which 
he  did,  I  will  allow  you  to  interpret  it  without, 
provided  you  will  try  to  tell  no  lies  about  it.  Well, 
I  dreamed  a  dream,  and  lo  !  father  had  failed,  and 
mother  said  that  *  our  rye- field,  which  she  and  I 
planted,  was  mortgaged  to  Seth  Nims.'  I  hope  it 
is  not  true ;  but  do  write  soon  and  tell  me,  for  you 
know  I  should  expire  of  mortification  to  have  our 
rye-field  mortgaged,  to  say  nothing  of  its  faUing  into 
the  merciless  hands  of  a  loco  ! 

Won't  you  please  to  tell  me  when  you  answer  my 
letter  who  the  candidate  for  President  is  ?  I  have 
been  trying  to  find  out  ever  since  I  came  here,  and 
have  not  yet  succeeded.  I  don't  know  anything 
more  about  affairs  in  the  world  than  if  I  were  in 
a  trance,  and  you  must  imagine  with  all  your 
'  Sophomoric  discernment '  that  it  is  but  little  and 
very  faint.  Has  the  Mexican  War  terminated  yet,^ 
and  how?  Are  we  beaten?  Do  you  know  of  any 
nation  about  to  besiege  South  Hadley?  If  so,  do 
inform  me  of  it,  for  I  would  be  glad  of  a  chance  to 
escape,  if  we  are  to  be  stormed.  I  suppose  Miss 
Lyon  would  furnish  us  all  with  daggers  and  order  us 
to  fight  for  our  lives  in  case  such  perils  should  befall 
us.  .  .  .  Miss  F.  told  me  if  I  was  writing  to  Am- 
herst to  send  her  love.  Not  specifying  to  whom, 
you  may  deal  it  out  as  your  good  sense  and  discretion 
prompt.    Be  a  good  boy  and  mind  me  ! 


68  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1847 

[South  Hadley,  November  2,  1S47.] 

Tuesday  Noon. 

My  dear  Brother  Austin, —  I  have  this  mo- 
ment finished  my  recitation  in  history,  and  have  a 
few  minutes  which  I  shall  occupy  in  answering  your 
short  but  welcome  letter.  You  probably  heard  that 
I  was  alive  and  well  yesterday,  unless  Mr  E. 
Dickinson  was  robbed  of  a  note  whose  contents 
were  to  that  effect.  But  as  robbers  are  not  very 
plenty  now-a-days,  I  will  have  no  forebodings  on  that 
score,  for  the  present.  How  do  you  get  along  with- 
out me  now,  and  does  *  it  seem  any  more  like  a 
funeral '  than  it  did  before  your  visit  to  your  humble 
servant  in  this  place  ?  Answer  me  !  I  want  much 
to  see  you  all  at  home,  and  expect  to  three  weeks 
from  to-morrow  if  nothing  unusual,  like  a  famine  or 
a  pestilence,  occurs  to  prevent  my  going  home. 
I  am  anticipating  much  in  seeing  you  on  this  week 
Saturday,  and  you  had  better  not  disappoint  me ! 
for  if  you  do,  I  will  harness  the  '  furies,'  and  pur- 
sue you  with  '  a  whip  of  scorpions,'  which  is  even 
worse,  you  will  find,  than  the  *long  oat'  which 
you  may  remember.  .  .  .  Tell  father  I  am  obliged 
to  him  much  for  his  offers  of  pecuniary  assistance, 
but  do  not  need  any.  We  are  furnished  with 
an  account-book  here,  and  obliged  to  put  down 
every  mill  which  we  spend,  and  what  we  spend  it 
for,  and  show  it  to  Miss  Whitman  every  Saturday ; 
so  you  perceive  your  sister  is  learning  accounts  in 


1847]      TO  MR  WILLIAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON       69 

addition  to  the  other  branches  of  her  education. 
I  am  getting  along  nicely  in  my  studies^  and  am 
happy,  quite,  for  me. 
Do  write  a  long  letter  to 

Your  affectionate  sister, 

Emily. 

Enclosed  with  this  was  a  delicately  written 
*  bill  of  fare '  for  one  of  the  Seminary  dinners. 


SOUTH   HADLEY   SEMINARY 

Nov.  2d,  1847 

BILL  OF  FARE 

Roast  Veal 

Potatoes 

Squash 

Gravy 

Wheat  and  Brown  Bread 

Butter 

Pepper  and  Salt 

Dessert 

Apple  Dumpling 
Sauce 

Water 
Is  n't  that  a  dinner  fit  to  set  before  a  king? 


70  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1848 

[South  Hadley,  December  11,  1847.] 

Saturday,  P,  M. 

My  dear  Brother  Austin,  —  ...  I  finished  my 
examination  in  Euclid  last  evening,  and  without  a 
failure  at  any  time.  You  can  easily  imagine  how 
glad  I  am  to  get  through  with  four  books,  for  you 
have  finished  the  whole  forever.  .  .  .  How  are  you 
all  at  home,  and  what  are  you  doing  this  vacation  ? 
You  are  reading  Arabian  Nights,  according  to  Viny's 
statement.  I  hope  you  have  derived  much  bene- 
fit from  their  perusal,  and  presume  your  powers  of 
imagining  will  vastly  increase  thereby.  But  I  must 
give  you  a  word  of  advice  too.  Cultivate  your  other 
powers  in  proportion  as  you  allow  imagination  to 
captivate  you.     Am  not  I  a  very  wise  young  lady? 

I  had  almost  forgotten  to  tell  you  what  my  studies 
are  now  —  *  better  late  than  never.'  They  are 
Chemistry,  Physiology,  and  quarter  course  in  Al- 
gebra. I  have  completed  four  studies  already,  and 
am  getting  along  well.  Did  you  think  that  it  was 
my  birthday  yesterday?  I  don't  believe  I  am 
seventeen  /  .  .  . 

From  your  affectionate  sister, 

Emily. 

[South  Hadley,  about  February  14,  1848.] 

Thursday  Mom, 
My  dear  Austin,  —  You  will  perhaps  imagine 
from  my  date  that  I  am  quite  at  leisure,  and  can  do 


1848]      TO  MR  WILLIAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON       J I 

what  I  please  even  in  the  forenoon,  but  one  of  our 
teachers,  who  is  engaged,  received  a  visit  from  her 
intended  quite  unexpectedly  yesterday  afternoon, 
and  she  has  gone  to  her  home  to  show  him,  I 
opine,  and  will  be  absent  until  Saturday.  As  I 
happen  to  recite  to  her  in  one  of  my  studies,  her 
absence  gives  me  a  little  time  in  which  to  write. 

Your  welcome  letter  found  me  all  engrossed  in 
the  study  of  sulphuric  acid  !  I  deliberated  for  a 
few  moments  after  its  reception  on  the  propriety  of 
canying  it  to  Miss  Whitman,  your  friend.  The  re- 
sult of  my  deliberation  was  a  conclusion  to  open  it 
with  moderation,  peruse  its  contents  with  sobriety 
becoming  my  station,  and  if  after  a  close  investiga- 
tion of  its  contents  I  found  nothing  which  savored 
of  rebellion  or  an  unsubdued  will,  I  would  lay  it 
away  in  my  folio,  and  forget  I  had  received  it.  Are 
you  not  gratified  that  I  am  so  rapidly  gaining  cor- 
rect ideas  of  female  propriety  and  sedate  deport- 
ment? After  the  proposed  examination,  finding  it 
concealed  no  dangerous  sentiments,  I  with  great 
gravity  deposited  it  with  my  other  letters,  and  the 
impression  that  I  once  had  such  a  letter  is  entirely 
obliterated  by  the  waves  of  time. 

I  have  been  quite  lonely  since  I  came  back,  but 
cheered  by  the  thought  that  I  am  not  to  return 
another  year,  I  take  comfort,  and  still  hope  on. 
My  visit  at  home  was  happy,  very  happy  to  me ; 
and  had  the  idea  of  in  so  short  a  time  returning  been 
constantly  in  my  dreams  by  night  and  day,  I  could 


'Jl  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1848 

not  have  been  happier.  '  There  is  no  rose  without 
a  thorn'  to  me.  Home  was  always  dear  to  me, 
and  dearer  still  the  friends  around  it;  but  never 
did  it  seem  so  dear  as  now.  All,  all  are  kind  to 
me,  but  their  tones  fall  strangely  on  my  ear,  and 
their  countenances  meet  mine  not  like  home-faces, 
I  can  assure  you  most  sincerely.  Then  when 
tempted  to  feel  sad,  I  think  of  the  blazing  fire  and 
.he  cheerful  meal  and  the  chair  empty  now  I  am 
gone.  I  can  hear  the  cheerful  voices  and  the 
merry  laugh,  and  a  desolate  feeling  comes  home  to 
my  heart,  to  think  I  am  alone.  But  my  good  angel 
only  waits  to  see  the  tears  coming  and  then 
whispers,  *  Only  this  year !  only  twenty-two  weeks 
more,  and  then  home  again  you  will  be  to  stay.' 
To  you,  all  busy  and  excited,  I  suppose  the  time 
flies  faster ;  but  to  me  slowly,  very  slowly,  so  that 
I  can  see  his  chariot  wheels  when  they  roll  along, 
and  himself  is  often  visible.  But  I  will  no  longer 
imagine,  for  your  brain  is  full  of  Arabian  Nights^ 
fancies,  and  it  will  not  do  to  pour  fuel  on  your 
already  kindled  imagination.  .  .  . 

I  suppose  you  have  written  a  few  and  received  a 
quantity  of  valentines  this  week.  Every  night  have 
I  looked,  and  yet  in  vain,  for  one  of  Cupid's  mes- 
sengers. Many  of  the  girls  have  received  very 
beautiful  ones ;  and  I  have  not  quite  done  hoping 
for  one.  Surely  my  friend  Thomas  has  not  lost  all 
his  former  affection  for  me  !  I  entreat  you  to  tell 
^im   I  am  pining  for  a  valentine.      I  am  sure  I 


1848]      TO  MR  WILUAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON        73 

shall  not  very  soon  forget  last  Valentine  week,  nor 
any  the  sooner  the  fun  I  had  at  that  time.  .  .  . 
Monday  afternoon  Mistress  Lyon  arose  in  the  hall, 
and  forbade  our  sending  *  any  of  those  foolish  notes 
called  valentines.*  But  those  who  were  here  last 
year,  knowing  her  opinions,  were  sufficiently  cun- 
ning to  write  and  give  them  into  the  care  of  D. 
during  the  vacation;  so  that  about  150  were  de- 
spatched on  Valentine  mom,  before  orders  should 
be  put  down  to  the  contrary  effect.  Hearing  of 
this  act,  Miss  Whitman,  by  and  with  the  advice  and 
consent  of  the  other  teachers,  with  frowning  brow, 
sallied  over  to  the  Post  Office  to  ascertain,  if  pos- 
sible, the  number  of  the  valentines,  and  worse 
still,  the  names  of  the  offenders.  Nothing  has  yet 
been  heard  as  to  the  amoimt  of  her  information, 
but  as  D.  is  a  good  hand  to  help  the  girls,  and  no 
one  has  yet  received  sentence,  we  begin  to  think  her 
mission  unsuccessful.  I  have  not  written  one,  nor 
do  I  intend  to. 

Your  injunction  to  pile  on  the  wood  has  not  been 
unheeded,  for  we  have  been  obliged  to  obey  it  to 
keep  from  freezing  up.  .  .  .  We  cannot  have  much 
more  cold  weather,  I  am  sure,  for  spring  is  near. 
.  .  .  Professor  Smith  preached  here  last  Sabbath, 
and  such  sermons  I  never  heard  in  my  life.  We 
were  all  charmed  with  him,  and  dreaded  to  have 
him  close.  .  .  . 

Your  affectionate  sister, 

EMn.Y. 


74  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  \\%\% 

[South  Hadley,  late  May,  1848.] 

Monday  Morn, 

My  dear  Austin, — I  received  a  letter  from  home 

on  Saturday  by  Mr  G S ,  and  father  wrote 

in  it  that  he  intended  to  send  for  cousin  Emily  and 
myself  on  Saturday  of  this  week  to  spend  the  Sab- 
bath at  home.  I  went  to  Miss  Whitman,  after  receiv- 
ing the  letter,  and  asked  her  if  we  could  go  if  you 
decided  to  come  for  us.  She  seemed  stunned  by  my 
request,  and  could  not  find  utterance  to  an  answer 
for  some  time.  At  length  she  said,  'Did  you  not 
know  it  was  contrary  to  the  rules  of  the  Seminary  to 
ask  to  be  absent  on  the  Sabbath  ? '  I  told  her  I  did 
not.  She  then  took  a  Catalogue  from  her  table,  and 
showed  me  the  law  in  full  at  the  last  part  of  it.  She 
closed  by  saying  that  we  could  not  go,  and  I  returned 
to  my  room  without  farther  ado.  So  you  see  I  shall 
be  deprived  of  the  pleasure  of  a  visit  home,  and  you 
that  of  seeing  me,  if  I  may  have  the  presumption  to 
call  it  a  pleasure  !  The  teachers  are  not  willing  to 
let  the  girls  go  home  this  term  as  it  is  the  last  one, 
and  as  I  have  only  nine  weeks  more  to  spend  here, 
we  had  better  be  contented  to  obey  the  commands. 
We  shall  only  be  the  more  glad  to  see  one  another 
after  a  longer  absence,  that  will  be  all.  I  was  highly 
edified  with  your  imaginative  note  to  me,  and  think 
your  flights  of  fancy  indeed  wonderful  at  your  age  ! 
When  are  you  coming  to  see  me  —  it  would  be  very 
pleasant  to  us  to  receive  a  visit  from  your  highness 


1851]      TO  MR  WILUAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON       y$ 

if  yon  can  be  absent  from  home  long  enough  for  such 

a  purpose.  ...  I  can't  write  longer. 

Your  affectionate  sister, 

Emilie. 

The  next  letter  was  written  three  years  later, 
and  sent  to  Boston. 

[Amherst,  early  in  1851.] 

Sunday  Evening, 

It  might  not  come  amiss,  dear  Austin,  to  have  a  tid- 
ing or  two  concerning  our  state  and  feelings,  particu- 
larly when  we  remember  that  'Jamie  has  gone  awa*.' 

Our  state  is  pretty  comfortable,  and  our  feelings 
are  somewhat  solemn,  which  we  account  for  satis- 
factorily by  calling  to  mind  the  fact  that  it  is  the 
Sabbath  day.  Whether  a  certain  passenger  in  a  cer- 
tain yesterday's  stage  has  any  sombre  effect  on  our 
once  merry  household  or  the  reverse,  *I  dinna  choose 
to  tell,*  but  be  the  case  as  it  may,  we  are  rather  a 
crestfallen  company,  to  make  the  best  of  us,  and 
what  with  the  sighing  wind,  the  sobbing  rain,  and 
the  whining  of  Nature  generally,  we  can  hardly  con- 
tain ourselves,  and  I  only  hope  and  trust  that  your 
this-evening*s-lot  is  cast  in  far  more  cheery  places 
than  the  ones  you  leave  behind. 

We  are  enjo)ang  this  evening  what  is  called  a 
'northeast  storm'  —  a  little  north  of  east  in  case 
you  are  pretty  definite.  Father  thinks  it 's  *  amazin' 
raw,'  and  I  'm  half  disposed  to  think  that  he 's  in  the 
right  about  it,  though  I  keep  pretty  dark  and  don't 


'J^i  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1851 

say  much  about  it !  Vinnie  is  at  the  instrument, 
humming  a  pensive  air  concerning  a  young  lady  who 
thought  she  was  'almost  there.'  Vinnie  seems  much 
grieved,  and  I  really  suppose  /  ought  to  betake  my- 
self to  weeping ;  I  'm  pretty  sure  that  I  shaU  if  she 
don't  abate  her  singing. 

Father's  just  got  home  from  meeting  and  Mr 
Boltwood's,  found  the  last  quite  comfortable  and 
the  first  not  quite  so  well.  .  .  .  There  has  been  not 
much  stirring  since  when  you  went  away  —  I  should 
venture  to  say  prudently  that  matters  had  come  to  a 
stand  —  unless  something  new  'turns  up,'  I  cannot 
see  anything  to  prevent  a  quiet  season.  Father  takes 
care  of  the  doors  and  mother  of  the  windows,  and 
Vinnie  and  I  are  secure  against  all  outward  attacks. 
If  we  can  get  our  hearts  'under,'  I  don't  have  much 
to  fear  —  I  've  got  all  but  three  feelings  down,  if  I 
can  only  keep  them  1  .  .  . 

I  shall  think  of  you  to-morrow  with  four  and  twenty 
Irish  boys  all  in  a  row.  I  miss  you  very  much  —  I 
put  on  my  bonnet  to-night,  opened  the  gate  very 
desperately,  and  for  a  little  while  the  suspense  was 
terrible  —  I  think  I  was  held  in  check  by  some 
invisible  agent,  for  I  returned  to  the  house  without 
having  done  any  harm  ! 

If  I  had  n't  been  afraid  that  you  would  '  poke 
fun'  at  my  feelings,  I  had  written  a  sincere  letter, 
but  since  'the  world  is  hollow,  and  dollie's  stuffed 
with  sawdust,'  I  really  do  not  think  we  had  better 
expose  our  feelings.  .  .  . 

Your  dear  sister,  Emily. 


iSsi]      TO  MR  WILLIAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON       JJ 


[Amherst,  1851.] 

Sunday  Evening, 

I  received  your  letter,  Austin,  permit  me  to  thank 
you  for  it  and  to  request  some  more  as  soon  as  it 's 
convenient  —  permit  me  to  accord  with  your  dis- 
creet opinion  concerning  Swedish  Jennie,  and  to  com- 
mend the  heart  brave  enough  to  express  it  —  com- 
bating the  opinion  of  two  civilized  worlds  and  New 
York  into  the  bargain  must  need  considerable  daring 
—  indeed,  it  had  never  occurred  to  me  that  amidst 
the  hallelujahs  one  tongue  would  dare  be  dumb,  and 
much  less,  I  assure  you,  that  this  dissenting  one 
should  be  my  romantic  brother  !  For  I  had  looked 
for  delight  and  a  very  high  style  of  rapture  in  such  a 
youth  as  you.  .  .  . 

We  have  all  been  rather  piqued  at  Jennie's  singing 
so  well,  and  this  first  calumnious  whisper  pleases  us 
so  well,  we  rejoice  that  we  did  n't  come  —  our  visit 
is  yet  before  us.  .  .  .  You  haven't  told  us  yet  as 
you  promised  about  your  home  —  what  kind  of  peo- 
ple they  are  —  whether  you  find  them  pleasant  — 
whether  those  timid  gentlemen  have  yet  'found 
tongues  to  say.'  Do  you  find  the  life  and  living  any 
more  annoying  than  you  at  first  expected  —  do  you 
light  upon  any  friends  to  help  the  time  away  —  have 
you  whipped  any  more  bad  boys  —  all  these  are 
solemn  questions,  pray  give  them  proper  heed ! 

Two  weeks  of  your  time  are  gone ;  I  can't  help 
wondering  sometimes  if  you  would  love  to  see  us. 


78  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1851 


and  come  to  this  still  home.  ...  A  Senior  levee 
was  held  at  Professor  and  Mrs  Haven's  on  Tuesday 
of  last  week  —  Vinnie  played  pretty  well.  There's 
another  at  the  President's  this  next  Friday  evening. 
Clarum  et  venerabile  Seniors  ! 

[AmKerst,  March,  1851.] 

Sunday  Afternoon, 
...  It 's  a  glorious  afternoon  —  the  sky  is  blue 
and  warm  —  the  wind  blows  just  enough  to  keep  the 
clouds  sailing,  and  the  sunshine — oh  such  sunshine  ! 
It  isn't  like  gold,  for  gold  is  dim  beside  it;  it  isn't 
like  anything  which  you  or  I  have  seen  !  It  seems 
to  me  *Ik  Marvel'  was  bom  on  such  a  day;  I  only 
wish  you  were  here.  Such  days  were  made  on  pur- 
pose for  you  and  me ;  then  what  in  the  world  are 
you  gone  for?  Oh,  dear,  I  do  not  know,  but  this  I 
do  know,  that  if  wishing  would  bring  you  home,  you 
were  here  to-day.  Is  it  pleasant  in  Boston?  Of 
course  it  isn't,  though.  I  might  have  known  more 
than  to  make  such  an  inquiry.  No  doubt  the  streets 
are  muddy,  and  the  sky  some  dingy  hue,  and  I  can 
think  just  how  everything  bangs  and  rattles,  and 
goes  rumbling  along  through  stones  and  plank  and 
clay  !  I  don't  feel  as  if  I  could  have  you  there,  pos- 
sibly, another  day.  I'm  afraid  you'll  turn  into  a 
bank,  or  a  Pearl  Street  coimting-room,  if  you  have 
not  already  assumed  some  monstrous  shape,  living 
in  such  a  place. 

Let  me  see  —  April;  three  weeks  until  April  — 


i8si]      TO  MR  WILUAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON       79 

the  very  first  of  April  —  well,  perhaps  that  will  do, 
only  be  sure  of  the  week,  the  whole  week,  and  noth- 
ing but  the  week.  If  they  make  new  arrangements, 
give  my  respects  to  them,  and  tell  them  old  arrange- 
ments are  good  enough  for  you,  and  you  will  have 
them ;  then  if  they  raise  the  wind,  why,  let  it  blow 
—  there's  nothing  more  excellent  than  a  breeze 
now  and  then ! 

What  a  time  we  shall  have  Fast  day,  after  we  get 
home  fh)m  meeting  —  why,  it  makes  me  dance  to 
think  of  it;  and  Austin,  if  I  dance  so  many  days 
beforehand,  what  will  become  of  me  when  the  hour 
really  arrives?  I  don't  know,  I  *m  sure ;  and  I  don*t 
care,  much,  for  that  or  for  anything  else  but  get  you 
home.  .  .  .  Much  love  from  mother  and  Vinnie; 
we  are  now  pretty  well,  and  our  hearts  are  set  on 

April,  the  very  first  of  April ! 

Emilie. 

[Amherst,  late  March,  1851.] 

Thursday  Night, 

Dear  Austin,  —  ...  I  have  read  Ellen  Middle- 
ton.  I  need  n't  tell  you  I  like  it,  nor  need  I  tell 
you  more,  for  you  know  already. 

I  thank  you  more  and  more  for  all  the  pleasures 

you  give  me  —  I  can  give  you  nothing,  Austin,  but 

a  warm  and  grateful  heart  that  is  yours  now  and 

always.     Love  from  all. 

Emilie. 

Only  think,  you  are  coming  Saturday  I     I  don't 


80  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1851 

know  why  it  is  that  it  *s  always  Sunday  immediately 
you  get  home.  I  will  arrange  it  differently.  If  it 
was  n*t  twelve  o'clock  I  would  stay  longer. 

[Amherst,  June  16^  185 1.] 

Sunday  Evening, 

.  .  .  I  'm  glad  you  are  so  well  pleased,  I  'm  glad 
you  are  not  delighted.  I  would  not  that  foreign 
places  should  wear  the  smile  of  home.  We  are 
quite  alarmed  for  the  boys  —  hope  you  won't  kill  or 
pack  away  any  of  'em  —  so  near  Dr  Webster's  bones 
't  is  not  strange  you  have  had  temptations !  .  .  . 
The  country 's  still  just  now,  and  the  severities  al- 
luded to  will  have  a  salutary  influence  in  waking  the 
people  up.  Speaking  of  getting  up,  how  early  are 
metropolitans  expected  to  wake  up,  especially  young 
men  —  more  especially  school-masters  ?  I  miss  my 
*  department'  mornings.  I  lay  it  quite  to  heart  that 
I  've  no  one  to  wake  up.  Your  room  looks  lonely 
enough,  I  do  not  love  to  go  in  there ;  whenever  I 
pass  through  I  find  I  'gin  to  whistle,  as  we  read  that 
little  boys  are  wont  to  do  in  the  graveyard.  I  am 
going  to  set  out  crickets  as  soon  as  I  find  time, 
that  they  by  their  shrill  singing  shall  help  disperse 
the  gloom ;  will  they  grow  if  I  transplant  them  ? 

You  importune  me  for  news ;  I  am  very  sorry  to  say 
'  Vanity  of  vanities  '  there  's  no  such  thing  as  news 
—  it  is  almost  time  for  the  cholera,  and  then  things 
^U  take  a  start !  ...  All  of  the  folks  send  love. 

Your  affectionate 

Eboly. 


1851]      TO  MR  WILLIAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON        8 1 

[July  5,  1851.] 

Sunday  Afternoon. 

I  have  just  come  in  from  church  very  hot  and 
faded.  .  .  .  Our  church  grows  interesting  —  Zion 
lifts  her  head  —  I  overhear  remarks  signifying  Jeru- 
salem,  —  I  do  not  feel  at  liberty  to  say  any  more 
to-day ! 

...  I  wanted  to  write  you  Friday,  the  night  of 
Jennie  Lind,  but  reaching  home  past  midnight,  and 
my  room  sometime  after,  encountering  several  perils 
starting  and  on  the  way,  among  which  a  kicking 
horse,  an  inexperienced  driver,  a  number  of  Jove's 
thunderbolts,  and  a  very  terrible  rain,  are  worthy  to 
have  record.  All  of  us  went — just  four  —  add  an 
absent  individual  and  that  will  make  full  five.  The 
concert  commenced  at  eight,  but  knowing  the  world 
was  hollow  we  thought  we  'd  start  at  six,  and  come 
up  with  everybody  that  meant  to  come  up  with  us ; 
we  had  proceeded  some  steps  when  one  of  the 
beasts  showed  symptoms ;  and  just  by  the  black- 
smith's shop  exercises  commenced,  consisting  of 
kicking  and  plunging  on  the  part  of  the  horse,  and 
whips  and  moral  suasion  from  the  gentleman  who 
drove  —  the  horse  refused  to  proceed,  and  your 
respected  femily  with  much  chagrin  dismounted, 
advanced  to  the  hotel,  and  for  a  season  halted; 
another  horse  procured,  we  were  politely  invited  to 
take  our  seats,  and  proceed,  which  we  refused  to  do 
till  the  animal  was  warranted.     About  half  through 

VOL.  I. — 6 


82  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1851 

our  journey  thunder  was  said  to  be  heard,  and  a 
suspicious  cloud  came  travelling  up  the  sky.  What 
words  express  our  horror  when  rain  began  to  fall, 
in  drops,  sheets,  cataracts  —  what  fancy  conceive 
of  drippings  and  of  drenchings  which  we  met  on 
the  way;  how  the  stage  and  its  mourning  captives 
drew  up  at  Warner's  Hotel ;  how  all  of  us  alighted, 
and  were  conducted  in,  —  how  the  rain  did  not 
abate,  —  how  we  walked  in  silence  to  the  old  Ed- 
wards church^  and  took  our  seats  in  the  same  — 
how  Jennie  came  out  like  a  child  and  sang  and  sang 
again  —  how  bouquets  fell  in  showers,  and  the  roof 
was  rent  with  applause  —  how  it  thundered  outside, 
and  inside  with  the  thunder  of  God  and  of  men  — 
judge  ye  which  was  the  loudest ;  how  we  all  loved 
Jennie  Lind,  but  not  accustomed  oft  to  her  manner 
of  singing  did  n't  fancy  that  so  well  as  we  did  her^ 
No  doubt  it  was  very  fine,  but  take  some  notes  from 
her  Echo,  the  bird  sounds  from  the  Bird  Songy  and 
some  of  her  curious  trills,  and  I  *d  rather  have  a 
Yankee. 

Herself  and  not  her  music  was  what  we  seemed 
to  love  —  she  has  an  air  of  exile  in  her  mild  blue 
eyes,  and  a  something  sweet  and  touching  in  her 
native  accent  which  charms  her  many  friends.  Give 
me  my  thatched  cottage  as  she  sang  she  grew  so 
earnest  she  seemed  half  lost  in  song,  and  for  a  tran- 
sient time  I  fancied  she  had  found  it  and  would  be 

1  Evidently  a  slip  of  the  pen,  as  Jenny  Lind  sang  in  the 
old  First  Church  at  Northampton  on  that  occasion. 


1851]      TO  MR  WILLIAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON       83 

seen  *  na  mair ; '  and  then  her  foreign  accent  made 
her  again  a  wanderer  —  we  will  talk  about  her  some- 
time when  you  come.  Father  sat  all  the  evening 
looking  mady  and  yet  so  much  amused  you  would 
have  died  a-laughing.  ...  It  wasn't  sarcasm  ex- 
actly, nor  it  was  n't  disdain,  it  was  infinitely  funnier 
than  either  of  those  virtues,  as  if  old  Abraham 
had  come  to  see  the  show,  and  thought  it  was  all 
very  well,  but  a  little  excess  of  monkey  /  She  took 
;J4,ooo  for  tickets  at  Northampton  aside  from  all 
expenses.  .  .  . 

About  our  coming  to  Boston  —  we  think  we  shall 
probably  come  —  we  want  to  see  our  friends,  your- 
self and  Aunt  L.'s  family.  We  don't  care  a  fig 
for  the  Museum,  the  stillness,  or  Jennie  Lind.  .  .  . 
Love  from  us  all. 

Your  affectionate  sister, 

Emily. 

[Late  July,  1851.] 

Sunday  Evening. 

.  .  .  Oh  how  I  wish  I  could  see  your  world  and 
its  little  kingdoms,  and  I  wish  I  could  see  the  king 

—  Stranger !  he  was  my  brother  !  I  fancy  little  boys 
of  several  little  sizes,  some  of  them  clothed  in  blue 
cloth,  some  of  them  clad  in  gray  —  I  seat  them 
round  on  benches  in  the  school-room  of  my  mind 

—  then  I  set  them  all  to  shaking  —  on  peril  of  their 
lives  that  they  move  their  lips  or  whisper;  then 
I  clothe  you  with  authority  and  empower  you  to 


84  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1851 

punish,  and  to  enforce  the  law,  I  call  you  '  Rabbi, 
Master/  and  the  picture  is  complete !  It  would 
seem  very  funny,  say  for  Vinnie  and  me  to  come 
round  as  Committee  —  we  should  enjoy  the  terrors 
of  fifty  little  boys,  and  any  specimens  of  discipline 
in  your  way  would  be  a  rare  treat  for  us.  I  should 
love  to  know  how  you  managed  —  whether  govern- 
ment as  a  science  is  laid  down  and  executed,  or 
whether  you  cuff  and  thrash  as  the  occasion  dic- 
tates I  whether  you  use  pure  law  as  in  the  case  of 
commanding,  or  whether  you  enforce  it  by  means  of 
sticks  and  stones  as  in  the  case  of  agents.  I  sup- 
pose you  have  authority  bounded  but  by  their  lives. 
...  I  should  think  you  *d  be  tired  of  school  and 
teaching  and  such  hot  weather.  I  really  wish  you 
were  here,  and  the  Endicott  school  where  you  found 
it.  Whenever  we  go  to  ride  in  our  beautiful  family 
carriage  we  think  if  '  wishes  were  horses '  we  four 
'  beggars  would  ride.*  We  shall  enjoy  brimful  every- 
thing now  but  half  full,  and  to  have  you  home  once 
more  will  be  like  living  again. 

We  are  having  a  pleasant  summer  —  without  one 
of  the  five  it  is  yet  a  lonely  one.  Vinnie  says  some- 
times —  Did  n't  we  have  a  brother  —  it  seems  to  me 
we  did,  his  name  was  Austin — we  call  but  he 
answers  not  again  —  echo,  Where  is  Austin?  laugh- 
ing, '  Where  is  Austin  ?*...!  wish  they  need  not 
exhibit  just  for  once  in  the  year,  and  give  you  up 
on  Saturday  instead  of  the  next  week  Wednesday; 
but  keep  your  courage  up  and  show  forth  those 


1851]      TO  MR   WILUAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON       85 

Emerald  Isles  till  school  committees  and  mayors 
are  blinded  with  the  dazzling !  Would  n't  I  love  to 
be  there !  .  .  . 

Our  apples  are  ripening  fast  I  am  fully  con- 
vinced that  with  your  approbation  they  will  not  only 
pick  themselves,  but  arrange  one  another  in  baskets 
and  present  themselves  to  be  eaten. 

Love  from  all. 

Emilie. 

[August,  1851.] 

Sunday  Afternoon, 

At  my  old  stand  again,  dear  Austin,  and  happy 
as  a  queen  to  know  that  while  I  speak  those  whom 
I  love  are  listening,  and  I  am  happier  still  if  I  shall 
make  them  happy. 

I  have  just  finished  reading  your  letter  which  was 
brought  in  since  church.  I  like  it  grandly  —  very 
—  because  it  is  so  long,  and  also  it  *s  so  funny  —  we 
have  all  been  laughing  till  the  old  house  rung  again 
at  your  delineation  of  men,  women,  and  things.  I 
feel  quite  like  retiring  in  presence  of  one  so  grand, 
and  casting  my  small  lot  among  small  birds  and 
fishes;  you  say  you  don't  comprehend  me,  you 
want  a  simpler  style  —  gratitude  indeed  for  all  my 
fine  philosophy !  I  strove  to  be  exalted,  thinking  I 
might  reach  you,  and  while  I  pant  and  struggle  and 
climb  the  nearest  cloud,  you  walk  out  very  leisurely 
in  your  slippers  from  Empyrean,  and  without  the 
slightest  notice,  request  me  to  get  down  !  As  sim- 
ple as  you  please,  the  simplest  sort  of  simple  —  I  'D 


86  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1851 

be  a  little  ninny,  a  little  pussy  catty,  a  little  Red 
Riding  Hood ;  I  Ul  wear  a  bee  in  my  bonnet,  and 
a  rose-bud  in  my  hair,  and  what  remains  to  do 
you  shall  be  told  hereafter. 

Your  letters  are  richest  treats,  send  them  always 
just  such  warm  days  —  they  are  worth  a  score  of 
fans  and  many  refrigerators  —  the  only  difl&amp;culty 
they  are  so  queer^  and  laughing  such  hot  weather  is 
anything  but  amusing.  A  little  more  of  earnest, 
and  a  little  less  of  jest  until  we  are  out  of  August, 
and  then  you  may  joke  as  freely  as  the  father  of 
rogues  himself,  and  we  will  banish  care,  and  daily 
die  a-laughing ! 

It  is  very  hot  here  now ;  I  don  't  believe  it  *s  any 
hotter  in  Boston  than  it  is  here.  .  .  .  Vinnie  suggests 
that  she  may  sometimes  occur  to  mind  when  you 
would  like  more  collars  made.  I  told  her  I  would  n't 
tell  you  —  I  have  n*t,  however,  decided  whether  I 
will  or  not. 

I  often  put  on  five  knives  and  forks,  and  another 
tumbler,  forgetting  for  the  moment  that  *we  are 
not  all  here.'  It  occurs  to  me,  however,  and  I 
remove  the  extra,  and  brush  a  tear  away  in  memory 
of  my  brother. 

We  miss  you  now  and  always.  When  God  be- 
stows but  three,  and  one  of  those  is  withdrawn, 
the  others  are  left  alone.  .  .  .  Father  is  as  uneasy 
when  you  are  gone  away  as  if  you  catch  a  trout 
and  put  him  in  Sahara.  When  you  first  went  away 
he   came  home  very  frequently  —  walked  gravely 


1851]     TO  MR   WILLIAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON        8/ 

towards  the  bam,  and  returned  looking  very  stately 
—  then  strode  away  down  street  as  if  the  foe  was 
coming;  now  he  is  more  resigned  —  contents  him- 
self by  fancying  that  *we  shall  hear  to-day/  and 
then  when  we  do  not  hear,  he  wags  his  head  pro- 
found, and  thinks  without  a  doubt  there  will  be 
news '  to-morrow.'  *  Once  one  is  two,*  once  one  will 
be  two  —  ah,  I  have  it  here  ! 

I  wish  you  could  have  some  cherries  —  if  there 
was  any  way  we  would  send  you  a  basket  of  them  — 
they  are  very  large  and  delicious,  and  are  just  ripen- 
ing now.  Little  Austin  Grout  comes  every  day  to 
pick  them,  and  mother  takes  great  comfort  in  call- 
ing him  by  name,  from  vague  association  with  her 
departed  boy.  Austin,  to  tell  the  truth,  it  is  very 
still  and  lonely — I  do  wish  you  were  here.  .  .  . 
The  railroad  is  *a-workin*.*  My  love  to  all  my 
friends.  I  am  on  my  way  downstairs  to  put  the 
tea-kettle  boiling — writing  and  taking  tea  cannot 
sympathize.     If  you  forget  me  now,  your  right  hand 

shall  its  cunning. 

Emiue. 

[Written  after  a  visit  of  the  sisters  in  Boston.    Amherst, 

September  24, 185 i.j 

Tuesday  Evening, 

We  have  got  home,  dear  Austin.  It  is  very  lonely 
here  —  I  have  tried  to  make  up  my  mind  which  was 
better,  home  and  parents  and  country,  or  city  and 
smoke  and  dust  shared  with  the  only  being  whom  I 


88  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1851 

can  call  my  brother.  The  scales  donU  poise  very 
evenly,  but  so  far  as  I  can  judge,  the  balance  is  in 
your  favor.  The  folks  are  much  more  lonely  than 
while  we  were  away  —  they  say  they  seemed  to  feel 
that  we  were  straying  together  and  together  would 
return,  and  the  unattended  sisters  seemed  very  sad 
to  them.  .  .  .  They  have  had  a  number  of  friends 
to  call  and  visit  with  them.  Mother  never  was 
busier  than  while  we  were  away — what  with  fruit 
and  plants  and  chickens  and  sympathizing  friends 
she  really  was  so  hurried  she  hardly  knew  what 
to  do. 

Vinnie  and  I  came  safely,  and  met  with  no  mishap 
— r  the  bouquet  was  not  withered  nor  was  the  bottle 
cracked.  It  was  fortunate  for  the  freight  car  that 
Vinnie  and  I  were  there,  ours  being  the  only  bag- 
gage passing  along  the  line.  The  folks  looked  very 
funny  who  travelled  with  us  that  day —  they  were  dim 
and  faded,  like  folks  passed  away  —  the  conductor 
seemed  so  grand  with  about  half  a  dozen  tickets 
which  he  dispersed  and  demanded  in  a  very  small 
space  of  time  —  I  judged  that  the  minority  were 
travelling  that  day,  and  could  n't  hardly  help  smiling 
at  our  ticket  friend,  however  sorry  I  was  at  the  small 
amount  of  people  passing  along  his  way.  He  looked 
as  if  he  wanted  to  make  an  apology  for  not  having 
more  travellers  to  keep  him  company. 

The  route  and  the  cars  seemed  strangely  —  there 
were  no  boys  with  fruit,  there  were  no  boys  with 
pamphlets;    one  fearful  little  fellow  ventured  into 


1851]     TO  MR   WILLIAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON       89 

the  car  with  what  appeared  to  be  publications  and 
tracts;  he  offered  them  to  no  one,  and  no  one 
inquired  for  them,  and  he  seemed  greatly  relieved 
that  no  one  wanted  to  buy  them.  .  .  .  Mother  sends 
much  love,  and  Vinnie. 

Your  lonely  sister, 

Emily. 

[Amherst,  Autumn,  1851.] 

Saturday  Morn, 

Dear  Austin,  —  IVe  been  trying  to  think  this 
morning  how  many  weeks  it  was  since  you  went 
away  —  I  fail  in  calculations;  it  seems  so  long  to 
me  since  you  went  back  to  school  that  I  set  down 
days  for  years,  and  weeks  for  a  score  of  years  —  not 
reckoning  time  by  minutes,  I  don*t  know  what  to 
think  of  such  great  discrepancies  between  the  actual 
hours  and  those  which  *  seem  to  be.*  It  may  seem 
long  to  you  since  you  returned  to  Boston  —  how 
I  wish  you  would  stay  and  never  go  back  again. 
Everything  is  so  still  here,  and  the  clouds  are  cold 
and  gray  —  I  think  it  will  rain  soon.  Oh,  I  am  so 
lonely !  .  .  .  You  had  a  windy  evening  going  back 
to  Boston,  and  we  thought  of  you  many  times  and 
hoped  you  would  not  be  cold.  Our  fire  burned  so 
cheerfully  I  couldn't  help  thinking  of  how  many 
were  here,  and  how  many  were  away,  and  I  wished 
so  many  times  during  that  long  evening  that  the 
door  would  open  and  you  come  walking  in.  Home  I 
is  a  holy  thing,  —  nothing  of  doubt  or  distrust  can 


90  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1851 

enter  its  blessed  portals.  I  feel  it  more  and  more  aa 
the  great  world  goes  on,  and  one  and  another  for- 
sake in  whom  you  place  your  trust,  here  seems  in-) 
deed  to  be  a  bit  of  Eden  which  not  the  sin  of  any  J 
can  utterly  destroy,  —  smaller  it  is  indeed,  and  it 
may  be  less  fair,  but  fairer  it  is  and  brighter  than 
all  the  world  beside. 

I  hope  this  year  in  Boston  will  not  impair  your 
health,  and  I  hope  you  will  be  as  happy  as  you  used 
to  be  before.  I  don't  wonder  it  makes  you  sober  to 
leave  this  blessed  air  —  if  it  were  in  my  power  I 
would  on  every  morning  transmit  its  purest  breaths 
fragrant  and  cool  to  you.  How  I  wish  you  could 
have  it  —  a  thousand  little  winds  waft  it  to  me 
this  morning,  fragrant  with  forest  leaves  and  bright 
autumnal  berries.  I  would  be  willing  to  give  you 
my  portion  for  to-day,  and  take  the  salt  sea's  breath 
in  its  bright,  bounding  stead.  .  .  . 

Your  affectionate 

Embly. 

.  .  .  Mother  sends  her  love  and  your  waistcoat, 
thinking  you  '11  like  the  one,  and  quite  likely  need 
the  other. 

[Amherst,  October  2, 1851.] 

Wednesday  Noon, 

We  are  just  through  dinner,  Austin,  I  want  to  write 
so  much  that  I  omit  digestion,  and  a  dyspepsia  will 
probably  be  the  result.  ...  I  received  your  letter 


iSsi]     TO  MR   WILLIAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON       9 1 

yesterday.  .  .  .  You  say  we  must  n*t  trouble  to  send 
you  any  fruit,  also  your  clothes  must  give  us  no 
uneasiness.  I  don't  ever  want  to  have  you  say  any 
more  such  things.  They  make  me  feel  like  crying. 
If  you  'd  only  teased  us  for  it,  and  declared  that  you 
would  have  it,  I  should  n*t  have  cared  so  much  that 
we  could  find  no  way  to  send  you  any,  but  you 
resign  so  cheerfiiUy  your  birthright  of  purple  grapes, 
and  do  not  so  much  as  murmur  at  the  departing 
peaches,  that  I  hardly  can  taste  the  one  or  drink  the 
juice  of  the  other.  They  are  so  beautiful,  Austin,  — 
we  have  such  an  abundance  'while  you  perish  with 
hunger.* 

I  do  hope  some  one  will  make  up  a  mind  to  go 
before  our  peaches  are  quite  gone.  The  world  is 
full  of  people  travelling  everywhere,  until  it  occurs  to 
you  that  you  will  send  an  errand,  and  then  by  *  hook 
or  crook  *  you  can't  find  any  traveller  who,  for  money 
or  love,  can  be  induced  to  go  and  carry  the  oppro- 
brious package.     It 's  a  very  selfish  age,  that  is  all  I 

can  say  about  it.     Mr  Storekeeper  S has  been 

'almost  persuaded'  to  go,  but  I  believe  he  has  put 
it  off  'till  a  more  convenient  -seasoil,'  so  to  show 
my  disapprobation  I  sha'n'.t  buy  any  more  gloves  at 

Mr  S 's  store  !     Don't  you  think  it  will  seem 

very  cutting  to  see  me  pass  by  his  goods  and  pur- 
chase at  Mr  K 's?     I  don't  think  I  shall  retract 

should  he  regret  his  course  and  decide  to  go  to- 
morrow, because  it  is  the  principle  of  disappointing 
people  which  I  disapprove  !  .  .  . 


92  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1851 

The  peaches  are  very  large  —  one  side  a  rosy 
cheek,  and  the  other  a  golden,  and  that  peculiar 
coat  of  velvet  and  of  down  which  makes  a  peach  so 
beautiful.  The  grapes,  too,  are  fine,  juicy,  and  suck 
a  purple  —  I  fancy  the  robes  of  kings  are  not  a  tint 
more  royal.  The  vine  looks  like  a  kingdom,  with 
ripe  round  grapes  for  kings,  and  hungry  mouths  for 
subjects  —  the  first  instance  on  record  of  subjects 
devouring  kings  !  You  shall  have  some  grapes,  dear 
Austin,  if  I  have  to  come  on  foot  in  order  to  bring 
them  to  you. 

The  apples  are  very  fine  —  it  is  n't  quite  time  to 
pick  them  —  the  cider  is  almost  done  —  we  shall 
have  some  I  guess  by  Saturday,  at  any  rate  Sunday 
noon.  The  vegetables  are  not  gathered,  but  will  be 
before  very  long.  The  horse  is  doing  nicely;  he 
travels  *  like  a  bird  *  to  use  a  favorite  phrase  of  your 
delighted  mother's.  You  ask  about  the  leaves  — 
shall  I  say  they  are  falling?  They  had  begun  to  fall 
before  Vinnie  and  I  came  home,  and  we  walked  up 
the  steps  through  little  brown  ones  rustling.  .  .  . 

Vinnie  tells  me  she  has  detailed  the  news — she 
reserved  the  deaths  for  me,  thinking  I  might  fall 
short  of  my  usual  letter  somewhere.  In  accordance 
with  her  wishes  I  acquaint  you  with  the  decease  of 

your  aged  friend  Deacon .     He  had  no  disease 

that  we  know  of,  but  gradually  went  out.  .  .  .  Mon- 
day evening  we  were  all  startled  by  a  violent  church- 
bell  ringing,  and  thinking  of  nothing  but  fire,  rushed 
out  in  the  street  to  see.     The  sky  was  a  beautiful 


1851]     TO  MR   WILL/AM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON        93 

red,  bordering  on  a  crimson,  and  rays  of  a  gold  pink 

color  were  constantly  shooting  off  from  a  kind  of  sun 

in  the  centre.    People  were  alarmed  at  this  beautiful 

phenomenon,  supposing  that  fires  somewhere  were 

coloring  the  sky.     The  exhibition  lasted  for  nearly 

fifteen  minutes,  and  the  streets  were  full  of  people 

wondering  and  admiring.     Father  happened  to  see 

it  among  the  very  first,  and  rang  the  bell  himself  to 

call  attention  to  it.     You  will  have  a  full  account 

from  the  pen  of  Mr  Trumbull,  who,  I  have  not  a 

doubt,  was  seen  with  a  long  lead  pencil  a-noting 

down  the  sky  at  the  time  of  its  highest  glory.  .  .  . 

You  will  be  here  now  so  soon  —  we  are  impatient 

for  it  —  we  want  to  see  you,  Austin,  how  much  I 

cannot  say  here. 

Your  affectionate 

Emily. 

[Amherst,  early  October,  1851.] 

Friday  Morning* 

Dear  Austin, —  ...  I  would  not  spend  much 
strength  upon  those  little  school-boys  —  you  will 
need  it  all  for  something  better  and  braver  after  you 
get  away.  It  would  rejoice  my  heart  if  on  some 
pleasant  morning  you'd  turn  the  school-room  key 
on  Irish  boys,  nurse  and  all,  and  walk  away  to  free- 
dom and  the  sunshine  here  at  home.  Father  says 
all  Boston  would  n't  be  a  temptation  to  you  another 
year  —  I  wish  it  would  not  tempt  you  to  stay  another 
day.   Oh,  Austin,  it  is  wrong  to  tantalize  you  so  while 


94  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1851 


you  are  braving  all  things  m  tx^ing  to  fulfil  duty. 
\  Duty  is  black  and  brown  —  home  is  bright  and  shin- 
ing, 'and  the  spirit  and  the  bride  say  noro  ,  and  let 
him  that'  wandereth  come,  fo-  ^1  jld  ^^v  things 
are  ready/  We  are  having  such  lovely  weather  — 
the  air  is  as  sweet  and  still  —  now  and  then  a  gay 
leaf  falling  —  the  crickets  sing  all  day  long  —  high 
in  a  crimson  tree  a  belated  bird  is  singing  —  a 
thousand  little  painters  are  tingeing  hill  and  dale.  I 
admit  now,  Austin,  that  autumn  is  most  beautiful, 
and  spring  is  but  the  least,  yet  they  '  differ  as 
stars '  in  their  distinctive  glories.  How  happy  if  you 
were  here  to  share  these  pleasures  with  us  —  the 
fruit  should  be  more  sweet,  and  the  dying  day  more 
golden  —  merrier  the  falling  nut  if  with  you  we 
gathered  it  and  hid  it  down  deep  in  the  abyss  of 
basket ;  but  you  complain  not,  wherefore  do  we  ? 

Tuesday  evening  we  had  a  beautiful  time  reading 
and  talking  of  the  good  times  of  last  summer,  and 
we  anticipated  —  boasted  ourselves  of  to-morrow  — 
of  the  future  we  created,  and  all  of  us  went  to  ride 
in  an  air-bubble  for  a  carriage.  We  cherish  all  the 
past,  we  glide  a-down  the  present,  awake  yet  dream- 
ing; but  the  future  of  ours  together — there  the  bird 
sings  loudest,  and  the  sun  shines  always  there.  .  .  . 

I  had  a  dissertation  from  E.  C.  a  day  or  two  ago 
—  don't  know  which  was  the  author,  Plato  or  Soc- 
rates—  rather  think  Jove  had  a  finger  in  it.  .  .  . 
They  all  send  their  love.  Vinnie  sends  hers.  How 
soon  you  will  be  here  !    Days,  flee  away — 'lest  with 


I85^]      TO  MR   WILLIAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON        95 


a  whip  of  scorpioHiS  1  o^'^rtake  your  lingering.'  I  am 
in  a  hurry  —  this  pen  is  too  slow  for  me  —  'it  hath 
done  wb  "^  it  "ould.* 

^ci\\r^  affectionate 

Emily. 

[Amherst,  before  *  Cattle  Show/  185 1.] 

Friday  Mormng. 

.  .  .  The  breakfast  is  so  warm,  and  pussy  is  here 
a-singuig,  and  the  tea-kettle  sings  too,  as  if  to  see 
which  was  loudest,  and  I  am  so  afraid  lest  kitty 
should  be  beaten  —  yet  a  shadow  falls  upon  my 
morning  picture  —  where  is  the  youth  so  bold,  the 
•bravest  of  our  fold  —  a  seat  is  empty  here  — 
spectres  sit  in  your  chair,  and  now  and  then  nudge 
&amp;ther  with  their  long,  bony  elbows.  I  wish  you  were 
here,  dear  Austin ;  the  dust  falls  on  the  bureau  in 
your  deserted  room,  and  gay,  frivolous  spiders  spin 
away  in  the  comers.  I  don't  go  there  after  dark 
whenever  I  can  help  it,  for  the  twilight  seems  to 
pause  there,  and  I  am  half  afraid ;  and  if  ever  I  have 
to  go,  I  hurry  with  all  my  might,  and  never  look  be- 
hind me,  for  I  know  who  I  should  see. 

Before  next  Tuesday  —  oh,  before  the  coming 
stage,  will  I  not  brighten  and  brush  it,  and  open 
the  long-closed  blinds,  and  with  a  sweeping  broom 
will  I  not  bring  each  spider  down  from  its  home 
so  high,  and  tell  it  it  may  come  back  again  when 
master  has  gone  —  and  oh,  I  will  bid  it  to  be  a 
tardy  spider,  to  tarry  on  the  way ;  and  I  will  think 


96  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1851 

my  eye  is  fuller  than  sometimes,  though  why  I  can- 
not tell,  when  it  shall  rap  on  the  window  and  come 
to  live  again.  I  am  so  happy  when  I  know  how  soon 
you  are  coming  that  I  put  away  my  sewing  and  go 
out  in  the  yard  to  think.  I  have  tried  to  delay  the 
frosts,  I  have  coaxed  the  fading  flowers,  I  thought 
I  could  detain  a  few  of  the  crimson  leaves  until  you 
had  smiled  upon  them ;  but  their  companions  call 
them,  and  they  cannot  stay  away. 

You  will  find  the  blue  hills,  Austin,  with  the 
autumnal  shadows  silently  sleeping  on  them,  and 
there  will  be  a  glory  lingering  round  the  day,  so 
you  '11  know  autumn  has  been  here  ;  and  the  setting 
sun  will  tell  you,  if  you  don't  get  home  till  evening. 
...  I  thank  you  for  such  a  long  letter,  and  yet  if  I 
might  choose,  the  next  should  be  a  longer.  I  think 
a  letter  just  about  three  days  long  would  make  me 
happier  than  any  other  kind  of  one,  if  you  please, 

—  dated  at  Boston,  but  thanks  be  to  our  Father 
you  may  conclude  it  here.  Everything  has  changed 
since  my  other  letter,  —  the  doors  are  shut  this 
morning,  and  all  the  kitchen  wall  is  covered  with 
chilly  flies  who  are  trying  to  warm  themselves, — 
poor  things,  they  do  not  understand  that  there  are 
no  summer  mornings  remaining  to  them  and  me, 
and  they  have  a  bewildered  air  which  is  really  very 
droll,  did  n't  one  feel  sorry  for  them.  You  would 
say  't  was  a  gloomy  morning  if  you  were  sitting  here, 

—  the  frost  has  been  severe,  and  the  few  lingering 
leaves  seem  anxious  to  be  going,  and  wrap  their 


iSsi]     TO  MR  WILLIAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON       97 

&amp;ded  cloaks  more  closely  about  them  as  if  to  shield 
them  from  the  chilly  northeast  wind.  The  earth 
looks  like  some  poor  old  lady  who  by  dint  of  pains 
has  bloomed  e'en  till  now,  yet  in  a  forgetful  mo- 
ment a  few  silver  hairs  from  out  her  cap  come 
stealing,  and  she  tucks  them  back  so  hastily  and 
thinks  nobody  sees.  The  cows  are  going  to  pasture, 
and  little  boys  with  their  hands  in  their  pockets  are 
whistling  to  try  to  keep  warm.  Don't  think  that  the 
sky  will  frown  so  the  day  when  you  come  home  ! 
She  will  smile  and  look  happy,  and  be  full  of  sun- 
shine then,  and  even  should  she  frown  upon  her 
child  returning,  there  is  another  sky,  ever  serene 
and  fair,  and  there  is  another  sunshine,  though  it  be 
darkness  there ;  never  mind  faded  forests,  Austin, 
never  mind  silent  fields  —  here  is  a  little  forest, 
whose  leaf  is  ever  green ;  here  is  a  brighter  garden, 
where  not  a  frost  has  been ;  in  its  unfading  flowers  I 
hear  the  bright  bee  hum ;  prithee,  my  brother,  into 
my  garden  come ! 

Your  very  affectionate  sister. 

[November,  1851.] 

Thursday  Evening. 

Dear  Axjstin,  —  Something    seems    to  whisper 

*  He   is  thinking  of   home  this  evening,*  perhaps 

because  it  rains,  perhaps  because  it 's  evening  and 

the  orchestra  of  winds  perform  their  strange,  sad 

music.     I  would  n't  wonder  if  home  were  thinking 
vox.  I.  — 7 


98  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1851 

of  him ;  and  it  seems  so  natural  for  one  to  think  of 
the  other,  perhaps  it  is  no  superstition  or  omen  of 
this  evening,  —  no  omen  'at  all,  at  all,'  as  Mrs 
Mack  would  say. 

Father  is  staying  at  home  this  evening  it  is  so 
inclement  —  Vinnie  diverts  his  mind  with  little 
snatches  of  music ;  and  mother  mends  a  garment 
to  make  it  snugger  for  you  —  and  what  do  you 
think  /  do  among  this  family  circle?  I  am  think- 
ing of  you  with  all  my  might,  and  it  just  occurs  to 
me  to  note  a  few  of  my  thoughts  for  your  own  inspec- 
tion. '  Keeping  a  diary '  is  not  familiar  to  me  as 
to  your  sister  Vinnie,  but  her  own  bright  example 
is  quite  a  comfort  to  me,  so  I  '11  try. 

I  waked  up  this  morning  thinking  for  all  the 
world  I  had  had  a  letter  from  you  —  just  as  the 
seal  was  breaking,  father  rapped  at  my  door.  I 
was  sadly  disappointed  not  to  go  on  and  read ;  but 
when  the  four  black  horses  came  trotting  into  town, 
and  their  load  was  none  the  heavier  by  a  tiding 
for  me  —  I  was  not  disappointed  then,  it  was  harder 
to  me  than  had  I  been  disappointed.  ...  I  found 
I  had  made  no  provision  for  any  such  time  as  that. 
.  .  .  The  weather  has  been  unpleasant  ever  since 
you  went  away — Monday  morning  we  waked  up 
in  the  midst  of  a  furious  snow-storm  —  the  snow 
was  the  depth  of  an  inch ;  oh,  it  looked  so  wintry  ! 
By-and-by  the  sun  came  out,  but  the  wind  blew 
violently  and  it  grew  so  cold  that  we  gathered  all 
the  quinces,  put  up  the  stove  in  the  sitting-room. 


1851]     TO  MR  WILLIAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON       99 

and  bade  the  world  good-by.  Kind  clouds  came 
over  at  evening ;  still  the  sinking  thermometer  gave 
terrible  signs  of  what  would  be  on  the  morning. 
At  last  the  morning  came,  laden  with  mild  south 
winds,  and  the  winds  have  brought  the  rain,  so 
here  we  are.  .  .  .  Your  very  hasty  letter  just  at 
your  return  rejoiced  us  —  that  you  were  '  better  — 
happier —  heartier.*  What  made  you  think  of  such 
beautiful  words  to  tell  us  how  you  were,  and  how 
cheerful  you  were  feeling?  It  did  us  a  world  of 
good.  How  Httle  the  scribe  thinks  of  the  value  of 
his  line  —  how  many  eager  eyes  will  search  its  every 
meaning,  how  much  swifter  the  strokes  of  'the 
little  mystic  clock,  no  human  eye  hath  seen,  which 
ticketh  on  and  ticketh  on,  from  morning  until  e'en.' 
If  it  were  not  that  I  could  write  you,  you  could  not  go 
away ;  therefore  pen  and  ink  are  very  excellent  things. 
We  had  new  brown  bread  for  tea  —  when  it  came 
smoking  on  and  we  sat  around  the  table,  how  I  did 
wish  a  slice  could  be  reserved  for  you  !  You  shall 
have  as  many  loaves  as  we  have  eaten  slices  if  you 
will  but  come  home.  This  suggests  Thanksgiving, 
you  will  soon  be  here ;  then  I  can't  help  thinking 
of  how,  when  we  rejoice,  so  many  hearts  are  break- 
ing next  Thanksgiving  day.  What  will  you  say,i 
Austin,  if  I  tell  you  that  Jennie  Grout  and  merry 
Martha  Kingman  will  spend  the  day  above  ?  They 
are  not  here  —  'While  we  delayed  to  let  them 
forth,  angels  beyond  stayed  for  them.'  .  .  . 

Your  affectionate 

Emily. 


lOO  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1851 

[Amherst,  November  17,  185 1.] 

Sunday  Afternoon, 

Dear  Austin,  —  We  have  just  got  home  from 
meeting  —  it  is  very  windy  and  cold  —  the  hills 
from  our  kitchen  window  are  just  crusted  with  snow, 
which  with  their  blue  mantillas  makes  them  seem  so 
beautiful.  You  sat  just  here  last  Sunday,  where  I 
am  sitting  now ;  and  our  voices  were  nimbler  tlian 
our  pens  can  be,  if  they  try  never  so  hardly.  I 
should  be  quite  sad  to-day,  thinking  about  last  Sun- 
day, did  n*t  another  Sabbath  smile  at  me  so  pleasantly, 
promising  me  on  its  word  to  present  you  here 
again  when  *  six  days'  work  is  done.' 

Father  and  mother  sit  in  state  in  the  sitting- 
room  perusing  such  papers,  only,  as  they  are  well 
assured,  have  nothing  carnal  in  them;  Vinnie  is 
eating  an  apple  which  makes  me  think  of  gold, 
and  accompanying  it  with  her  favorite  Observer, 
which,  if  you  recollect,  deprives  us  many  a  time  of 
her  sisterly  society.  Pussy  has  n't  returned  from 
the  afternoon  assembly,  so  you  have  us  all  just 
as  we  are  at  present.  We  were  very  glad  indeed 
to  hear  from  you  so  soon,  glad  that  a  cheerful  fire 
met  you  at  the  door.  I  do  well  remember  how 
chilly  the  west  wind  blew,  and  how  everything 
shook  and  rattled  before  I  went  to  sleep,  and  I 
often  thought  of  you  in  the  midnight  car,  and  hoped 
you  were  not  lonely.  .  .  .  We  are  thinking  most  of 
Thanksgiving  than   anything   else  just  now  —  how 


1851]      TO  MR  WILLIAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON     lOI 

full  will  be  the  circle,  less  then  by  none  —  how  the 
things  will  smoke  —  how  the  board  will  groan  with 
the  thousand  savory  viands  —  how  when  the  day  is 
done,  lo,  the  evening  cometh,  laden  with  merrie 
laugh  and  happy  conversation,  and  then  the  sleep 
and  the  dream  each  of  a  knight  or  *  Ladie  ' —  how 
I  love  to  see  them,  a  beautiful  company  coming 
down  the  hill  which  men  call  the  Future,  with  their 
hearts  full  of  joy  and  their  hands  of  gladness. 
Thanksgiving  indeed  to  a  family  united  once  more 
together  before  they  go  away.  .  .  .  Don*t  mind  the 
days  —  some  of  them  are  long  ones,  but  who  cares 
for  length  when  breadth  is  in  store  for  him?  Or 
who  minds  the  cross  who  knows  he  *11  have  a 
crown?  I  wish  I  could  imbue  you  with  all  the 
strength  and  courage  which  can  be  given  men  —  I 
wish  I  could  assure  you  of  the  constant  remem- 
brance of  those  you  leave  at  home  —  I  wish  —  but 
oh !  how  vainly  —  that  I  could  bring  you  back 
again  and  never  more  to  stray.  You  are  tired  now, 
dear  Austin,  with  my  incessant  din,  but  I  can't  help 
saying  any  of  these  things. 

The  very  warmest  love  from  Vinnie  and  every  one 
of  us.     I  am  never  ready  to  go. 

Reluctant 

Emily. 


102  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [185* 

[December,  1851]. 

Monday  Morning, 

Dear  Austin,  —  ...  I  was  so  glad  to  get  your 
letter.  I  had  been  making  calls  all  Saturday  after- 
noon, and  came  home  very  tired,  and  a  little 
disconsolate,  so  your  letter  was  more  than  wel- 
come. ...  Oh  Austin,  you  don't  know  how  we  all 
wished  for  you  yesterday.  We  had  such  a  splendid 
sermon  from  Professor  Park  —  I  never  heard  any- 
thing like  it,  and  don't  expect  to  again,  till  we  stand 
at  the  great  white  throne,  and  '  he  reads  from  the 
Book,  the  Lamb's  Book.'  The  students  and  chapel 
people  all  came  to  our  church,  and  it  was  very  full, 
and  still,  so  still  the  buzzing  of  a  fly  would  have 
boomed  like  a  cannon.  And  when  it  was  all  over, 
and  that  wonderful  man  sat  down,  people  stared  at 
each  other,  and  looked  as  wan  and  wild  as  if  they 
had  seen  a  spirit,  and  wondered  they  had  not  died. 
How  I  wish  you  had  heard  him  —  I  thought  of  it 
all  the  time.  .  .  . 

Affectionately, 

Emhje. 

[Amherst,  January,  1852.] 

Monday  Morning.^ 
Did  you  think  I  was  tardy,  Austin  ?    For  two  Sim- 
day  afternoons  it  has  been  so  cold  and  cloudy  that 
I  did  n't  feel  in  my  very  happiest  mood,  and  so  I 
did  not  write  until  next  Monday  morning,  determin- 


iJS*]     TO  MR  WILUAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON      103 


ing  in  my  heart  never  to  write  to  you  in  any  but 
cheerful  spirits. 

Even  this  morning,  Austin,  I  am  not  in  merry 
pase,  for  it  snows  slowly  and  solemnly,  and  hardly 
an  outdoor  thing  can  be  seen  a-stirring  —  now  and 
then  a  man  goes  by  with  a  large  cloak  wrapped 
around  him,  and  shivering  at  that;  and  now  and 
then  a  stray  kitten  out  on  some  urgent  errand  creeps 
through  the  flakes  and  crawls  so  fast  as  may  crawl 
half  frozen  away.  I  am  glad  for  the  sake  of  your 
body  that  you  are  not  here  this  morning,  for  it  is  a 
trying  time  for  fingers  and  toes  — for  the  heart's 
sake  I  would  verily  have  you  here.  You  know  there 
are  winter  mornings  when  the  cold  without  only 
adds  to  the  warm  within,  and  the  more  it  snows  and 
the  harder  it  blows  brighter  the  fires  blaze,  and 
chirps  more  merrily  the  'cricket  on  the  hearth.* 
It  is  hardly  cheery  enough  for  such  a  scene  this 
morning,  and  yet  methinks  it  would  be  if  you  were 
only  here.  The  future  full  of  sleigh-rides  would 
chase  the  gloom  from  our  minds  which  only  deepens 
and  darkens  with  every  flake  that  falls. 

Black  Fanny  would  *  toe  the  mark '  if  you  should 
be  here  to-morrow ;  but  as  the  prospects  are,  I  pre- 
sume Black  Fanny's  hoofs  will  not  attempt  to  fly. 
Do  you  have  any  snow  in  Boston  ?  Enough  for  a 
ride,  I  hope,  for  the  sake  of  'Auld  Lang  Syne.' 
Perhaps  the  '  ladie  '  of  curls  would  not  object  to  a 
drive.  .  .  .  We  miss  you  more  and  more,  we  do 
not  become  accustomed   to   separation  from  you. 


I04  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1852 

I  almost  wish  sometimes  we  needn't  miss  you  so 
much,  since  duty  claims  a  year  of  you  entirely  to 
herself;  and  then  again  I  think  that  it  is  pleasant  to 
miss  you  if  you  must  go  away,  and  I  would  not  have 
it  otherwise,  even  if  I  could.  In  every  pleasure  and 
pain  you  come  up  to  our  minds  so  wishfully  —  we 
know  you  'd  enjoy  our  joy,  and  if  you  were  with  us, 
Austin,  we  could  bear  little  trials  more  cheerfully. 
.  .  .  When  I  know  of  anything  funny  I  am  just  as  apt 
to  cry,  far  more  so  than  to  laugh,  for  I  know  who 
loves  jokes  best,  and  who  is  not  here  to  enjoy  them. 
We  don't  have  many  jokes,  though,  now,  it  is  pretty 
much  all  sobriety ;  and  we  do  not  have  much  poetry, 
father  having  made  up  his  mind  that  it's  pretty 
much  all  real  life.  Father's  real  hfe  and  mine 
sometimes  come  into  collision  but  as  yet  escape  un- 
hurt. ...  I  am  so  glad  you  are  well  and  in  such 
happy  spirits  —  both  happy  and  well  is  a  great  com- 
fort to  us  when  you  are  far  away. 

Emilie. 

[February  6,  1852.] 

Friday  Morning, 

.  .  .  Since  we  have  written  you  the  grand  rail- 
road decision  is  made,  and  there  is  great  rejoicing 
throughout  this  town  and  the  neighboring;  that 
is,  Sunderland,  Montague,  and  Belchertown.  Every- 
body is  wide  awake,  everything  is  stirring,  the  streets 
are  full  of  people  walking  cheeringly,  and  you  should 
really  be  here  to  partake  of  the  jubilee.     The  event 


1852]     TO  MR  WILLIAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON      105 

was  celebrated  by  D.  Warner  and  cannon ;  and  the 
silent  satisfaction  in  the  hearts  of  all  is  its  crowning 
attestation. 

Father  is  really  sober  from  excessive  satisfaction, 
and  bears  his  honors  with  a  most  becoming  air. 
Nobody  believes  it  yet,  it  seems  like  a  fairy  tale,  a 
most  miraculous  event  in  the  lives  of  us  all.  The 
men  begin  working  next  week;  only  think  of  it, 
Austin ;  why,  I  verily  believe  we  shall  fall  down  and 
worship  the  first  '  son  of  Erin '  that  comes,  and  the 
first  sod  he  turns  will  be  preserved  as  an  emblem  of 
the  struggle  and  victory  of  our  heroic  fathers.  Such 
old  fellows  as  Col.  S.  and  his  wife  fold  their  arms 
complacently  and  say,  'Well,  I  declare,  we  have 
got  it  after  all.*  Got  it,  you  good-for-nothings  !  and 
so  we  have,  in  spite  of  sneers  and  pities  and  insults 
from  all  around ;  and  we  will  keep  it  too,  in  spite 
of  earth  and  heaven  !  How  I  wish  you  were  here  — 
it  is  really  too  bad,  Austin,  at  such  a  time  as  now. 
I  miss  your  big  hurrahs,  and  the  famous  stir  you 
make  upon  all  such  occasions ;  but  it  is  a  comfort 
to  know  that  you  are  here  —  that  your  whole  soul 
is  here,  and  though  apparently  absent,  yet  present 
in  the  highest  and  the  truest  sense.  .  .  .  Take  good 
care  of  yourself,  Austin,  and  think  much  of  us  all, 
for  we  do  so  of  you. 

Emilie. 

Several  subsequent  letters,  all  piquant  and 
breezy,  but  dealing  quite  entirely  with  family 


I06  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1852 

matters,  experiences  with   callers,  and  other 
personal  subjects,  have  been  omitted. 

[March  24,  1852.] 

Wednesday  Morn, 

You  would  n't  think  it  was  spring,  Austin,  if  you 
were  at  home  this  morning,  for  we  had  a  great  snow- 
storm yesterday,  and  things  are  all  white  this  morn- 
ing. It  sounds  funny  enough  to  hear  birds  singing 
and  sleigh-bells  at  a  time.  But  it  won't  last  long, 
so  you  need  n't  think  't  will  be  winter  at  the  time 
when  you  come  home. 

I  waited  a  day  or  two,  thinking  I  might  hear  from 
you,  but  you  will  be  looking  for  me,  and  wondering 
where  I  am,  so  I  sha'n't  wait  any  longer.  We  're 
rejoiced  that  you  're  coming  home  —  the  first  thing 
we  said  to  father  when  he  got  out  of  the  stage  was 
to  ask  if  you  were  coming.  I  was  sure  you  would 
all  the  while,  for  father  said  *  of  course  you  would,' 
he  should  *  consent  to  no  other  arrangement,*  and 
as  you  say,  Austin,  'what  father  says  he  means.' 
How  very  soon  it  will  be  now  —  why,  when  I  really 
think  of  it,  how  near  and  how  happy  it  is !  My 
heart  grows  light  so  fast  that  I  could  mount  a  grass- 
hopper and  gallop  around  the  world,  and  not  fatigue 
him  any !  The  sugar  weather  holds  on,  and  I  do 
believe  it  will  stay  until  you  come.  .  .  .  '  Mrs  S.'  is 
very  feeble ;  *  can't  bear  allopathic  treatment,  can't 
have   homoeopathic,  don't  want  hydropathic,'  oh. 


ttja]     TO  MR  WILLIAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON     lO/ 


what  a  pickle  she  is  in.  Should  n't  think  she  would 
deign  to  live,  it  is  so  decidedly  vulgar  !  They  have 
not  yet  concluded  where  to  move  —  Mrs  W.  will 
perhaps  obtain  board  in  the  celestial  city,  but  I  'm 
sure  I  can't  imagine  what  will  become  of  the  rest. 
.  •  •  Much  love  from  us  all. 

Emilie. 

[May  10,  1852.] 

Monday  Marningf  5  o'c. 

Dear  Austin,  —  ...  Vinnie  will  tell  you  all  the 
news,  so  I  will  take  a  little  place  to  describe  a  thun- 
der-shower which  occurred  yesterday  afternoon,  — 
the  very  first  of  the  season.  Father  and  Vinnie 
were  at  meeting,  mother  asleep  in  her  room,  and 
I  at  work  by  my  window  on  a  'Lyceum  lecture.' 
The  air  was  really  scorching,  the  sun  red  and  hot, 
and  you  know  just  how  the  birds  sing  before  a  thun- 
der-storm, a  sort  of  hurried  and  agitated  song  — 
pretty  soon  it  began  to  thunder,  and  the  great 
*  cream-colored  heads*  peeped  out  of  their  win- 
dows. Then  came  the  wind  and  rain,  and  I  hurried 
around  the  house  to  shut  all  the  doors  and  win- 
dows. I  wish  you  had  seen  it  come,  so  cool  and 
so  refreshing  —  and  everything  glistening  from  it  as 
with  a  golden  dew  —  I  thought  of  you  all  the  time. 
This  morning  is  fair  and  delightful.  You  will  awake 
in  dust,  and  with  it  the  ceaseless  din  of  the  untiring 
city.  Wouldn't  you  change  your  dwelling  for  my 
palace  in  the  dew?  Good-by  for  now.  I  shall  see 
you  so  soon.  E. 


I08  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1853 

Mr  Edward  Dickinson  was  in  Baltimore 
when  the  following  letter  was  written,  in 
attendance  upon  the  Whig  Convention  which 
sought,  unsuccessfully,  the  nomination  of 
Daniel  Webster  for  the  presidency. 

[Amherst,  June  21,  1852.] 

Sunday  Morning, 

.  .  .  Father  has  not  got  home,  and  we  don't 
know  when  to  expect  him.  We  had  a  letter  from 
him  yesterday,  but  he  did  n't  say  when  he  should 
come.  He  writes  that  he  *  should  think  the  whole 
world  was  there,  and  some  from  other  worlds.* 
He  says  he  meets  a  great  many  old  friends  and 
acquaintances,  and  forms  a  great  many  new  ones  — 
he  writes  in  very  fine  spirits,  and  says  he  enjoys 
himself  very  much.  ...  I  wish  you  could  have  gone 
with  him,  you  would  have  enjoyed  it  so,  but  I  did 
not  much  suppose  that  selfish  old  school  would  let 
you.  .  .  .  Last  week  the  Senior  levee  came  off  at 
the  President's.  I  believe  Professor  H^ven  is  to 
give  one  soon  —  and  there  is  to  be  a  reception  at 
Professor  Tyler's  next  Tuesday  evening  which  I  shall 
attend.  You  see  Amherst  is  growing  lively,  and  by 
the  time  you  come  everything  will  be  in  a  buzz.  .  .  . 
We  all  send  you  our  love. 

Emilie. 


1852]     TO  MR  WILLIAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON     IO9 

[Amherst,  July  23,  1852.] 

Sunday  Night. 

.  .  .  You  'd  better  not  come  home ;  I  say  the  law 
will  have  you,  a  pupil  of  the  law  o'ertaken  by  the 
law,  and  brought  to  condign  punishment,  —  scene  for 
angels  and  men,  or  rather  for  archangels,  who  being 
a  little  higher  would  seem  to  have  a  Vantage  so  far 
as  view  's  concerned.  *Are  you  pretty  comfortable, 
though,*  —  and  are  you  deaf  and  dumb  and  gone  to 
the  asylum  where  such  afflicted  persons  learn  to  hold 
their  tongues  ?  ♦ 

The  next  time  you  are  n't  going  to  write  me,  I  'd 
thank  you  to  let  me  know  —  this  kind  of  protracted 
insult  is  what  no  man  can  bear.  Fight  with  me  like 
a  man  —  let  me  have  fair  shot,  and  you  are  caput 
mortuum  et  cap-a-pie,  and  that  ends  the  business  ! 
If  you  really  think  I  so  deserve  this  silence,  tell  me 
why  —  how  —  I  *11  be  a  thorough  scamp  or  else  I 
won't  be  any,  just  which  you  prefer. 

T of  S 's  class  went  to  Boston  yesterday ; 

it  was  in  my  heart  to  send  an  apple  by  him  for  your 
private  use,  but  father  overheard  some  of  my  inten- 
tions, and  said  they  were  '  rather  small  *  —  whether 
this  remark  was  intended  for  the  apple,  or  for  my 
noble  self  I  did  not  think  to  ask  him ;  I  rather 
think  he  intended  to  give  us  both  a  cut  —  however, 
he  may  not ! 

You  are  coming  home  on  Wednesday,  as  perhaps 
you  know,  and  I  am  very  happy  in  prospect  of  your 


no  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICICINSON  [1852 

coming,  and  hope  you  want  to  see  us  as  much  as 
we  do  you.  Mother  makes*  nicer  pies  with  refer- 
ence to  your  coming,  I  arrange  my  thoughts  in  a 
convenient  shape,  Vinnie  grows  only  perter  and 
more  pert  day  by  day. 

The  horse  is  looking  finely  —  better  than  in  his 
life  —  by  which  you  may  think  him  dead  unless  I 
add  before.  The  carriage  stands  in  state  all  covered 
in  the  chaise-house  —  we  have  one  foundling  hen 
into  whose  young  mind  I  seek  to  instil  the  fact  that 
*  Massa  is  a-comin  ! ' 

The  garden  is  amazing  —  we  have  beets  and  beans, 
have  had  splendid  potatoes  for  three  weeks  now. 
Old  Amos  weeds  and  hoes  and  has  an  oversight  of 
all  thoughtless  vegetables.  The  apples  are  fine  and 
large  in  spite  of  my  impression  that  father  called 
them  'small.* 

Yesterday  there  was  a  fire.  At  about  three  in  the 
afternoon  Mr  Kimberly's  bam  was  discovered  to  be 
on  fire ;  the  wind  was  blowing  a  gale  directly  from 
the  west,  and  having  had  no  rain,  the  roofs  [were]  as 
dry  as  stubble.  Mr  Palmer's  house  was  charred  — 
the  little  house  of  father's — and  Mr  Kimberly's  also. 
The  engine  was  broken,  and  it  seemed  for  a  little 
while  as  if  the  whole  street  must  go ;  the  Kimberlys' 
bam  was  burnt  down,  and  the  house  much  charred 
and  injured,  though  not  at  all  destroyed  —  Mr 
Palmer's  bara  took  fire,  and  Deacon  Leland's  also, 
but  were  extinguished  with  only  part  burned  roofs. 
We  all  feel  very  thankful  at  such  a  narrow  escape. 


1853]      TO  MR   WILLIAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON     HI 

Father  says  there  was  never  such  imminent  danger, 
and  such  miraculous  escape.  Father  and  Mr  Frink 
took  charge  of  the  fire  —  or  rather  of  the  water, 
since  fire  usually  takes  care  of  itself.  The  men  all 
worked  like  heroes,  and  after  the  fire  was  out  father 
gave  commands  to  have  them  march  to  Howe's 
where  an  entertainment  was  provided  for  them. 
After  the  whole  was  over  they  gave  *  three  cheers  for 
Edward  Dickinson,*  and  three  more  for  the  insur- 
ance company.  On  the  whole,  it  is  very  wonderful 
that  we  did  n*t  all  bum  up,  and  we  ought  to  hold  our 
tongues  and  be  very  thankful.  If  there  must  be  a 
fire,  I  'm  sorry  it  could  n't  wait  until  you  had  got 
home,  because  you  seem  to  enjoy  such  things  so 
very  much. 

There  is  nothing  of  moment  now  which   I  can 
find  to  tell  you,  except  a  case  of  measles  in  Hartford.  ^ 
.  .  .  Good-by,  Sir.      Fare  you  well.     My  benison 
to  your  school. 

[Amherst,  Spring,  1853.] 

Tuesday  Nooiu 

Dear  Austin, —  .  .  .  How  soon  now  you  are  com- 
ing, and  how  happy  we  are  in  the  thought  of  seeing 
you  !  I  can't  realize  that  you  will  come,  it  is  so  still 
and  lonely  it  does  n't  seem  possible  it  can  be  other- 
wise ;  but  we  shall  see,  when  the  nails  hang  full  of 
coats  again,  and  the  chairs  hang  full  of  hats,  and  I 
can  count  the  slippers  under  the  chair.  Oh,  Austin, 
how  we  miss  them  all,  and  more  than  them,  some- 


1 12  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1853 

body  who  used  to  hang  them  there,  and  get  many  a 
hint  ungentle  to  carry  them  away.  Those  times  seem 
far  off  now,  a  great  way,  as  things  we  did  when  chil- 
dren. I  wish  we  were  children  now  —  I  wish  we 
were  always  children,  how  to  grow  up  I  don't  know. 
.  .  .  Cousin  J.  has  made  us  an  ^olian  harp  which 
plays  beautifully  whenever  there  is  a  breeze. 

Austin,  you  must  n't  care  if  your  letters  do  not  get 
here  just  when  you  think  they  will  —  they  are  always 
new  to  us,  and  delightful  always,  and  the  more  you 
send  us  the  happier  we  shall  be.  We  all  send  our 
love  to  you,  and  think  much  and  say  much  of  seeing 
you  again  —  keep  well  till  you  come,  and  if  knowing 
that  we  all  love  you  makes  you  happier,  then,  Austin, 
you  may  sing  the  whole  day  long  ! 

Affectionately, 

Emiue. 

[Amherst,  March  18,  1853.] 

Friday  Morning, 

Dear  Austin,  —  I  presume  you  remember  a  story 
that  Vinnie  tells  of  a  breach  of  promise  case  where 
the  correspondence  between  the  parties  consisted  of 
a  reply  from  the  girl  to  one  she  had  never  received 
but  was  daily  expecting.  Well,  /  am  writing  an  an- 
swer to  the  letter  I  have  n't  had,  so  you  will  see  the 
force  of  the  accompanying  anecdote.  I  have  been 
looking  for  you  ever  since  despatching  my  last,  but 
this  is  a  fickle  world,  and  it  *s  a  great  source  of  com- 
placency that  't  will  all  be  burned  up  by  and  by.     I 


1853]     TO  MR   WILUAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON      II3 

should  be  pleased  with  a  line  when  you  Ve  published 
your  work  to  father,  if  it 's  perfectly  convenient ! 

Your  letters  are  very  funny  indeed  —  about  the 
only  jokes  we  have,  now  you  are  gone,  and  I  hope 
you  will  send  us  one  as  often  as  you  can.  Father 
takes  great  delight  in  your  remarks  to  him  —  puts 
on  his  spectacles  and  reads  them  o'er  and  o'er  as  if 
it  was  a  blessing  to  have  an  only  son.  He  reads  all 
the  letters  you  write,  as  soon  as  he  gets  them,  at  the 
post-office,  no  matter  to  whom  addressed ;  then  he 
makes  me  read  them  aloud  at  the  supper  table  again, 
and  when  he  gets  home  in  the  evening,  he  cracks  a 
few  walnuts,  puts  his  spectacles  on,  and  with  your 
last  in  his  hand,  sits  down  to  enjoy  the  evening.  .  .  . 
I  beheve  at  this  moment,  Austm,  that  there  *s  nobody 
living  for  whom  father  has  such  respect  as  for  you. 
But  my  paper  is  getting  low,  and  I  must  hasten  to 
teU  you  that  we  are  very  happy  to  hear  good  news 
from  you,  that  we  hope  you  41  have  pleasant  times 
and  learn  a  great  deal  while  you  're  gone,  and  come 
back  to  us  greater  and  happier  for  the  life  lived  at 
Cambridge.  We  miss  you  more  and  more.  I  wish 
that  we  could  see  you,  but  letters  come  the  next  — 
write  them  often,  and  tell  us  everything. 

Affectionately, 

Emo^ie. 

TOL.  I.  —  8 


114  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1853 

[June  14, 1853.] 

.  .  .  We  have  been  free  from  company  by  the 
*  Amherst  and  Belchertown  Railroad*  since  J.  went 
home,  though  we  live  in  constant  fear  of  some  other 
visitation.  'Ob,  would  some  power  the  giftie  gie' 
folks  to  see  themselves  as  we  see  them.  —  Bums. 

I  have  read  the  poems,  Austin,  and  am  going  to 
read  them  again.  They  please  me  very  much,  but 
I  must  read  them  again  before  I  know  just  what 
I  think  of  'Alexander  Smith.*  They  are  not  very 
coherent,  but  there  *s  a  good  deal  of  exquisite  frenzy,, 
and  some  wonderful  figures  as  ever  I  ineFlri  my  life. 
We  will  talk  about  it  again.  The  grove  looks  nicely, 
Austin,  and  we  think  must  certainly  grow.  We  love 
to  go  there  —  it  is  a  charming  place.  Everything  is 
singing  now,  and  everything  is  beautiful  that  can  be 
in  its  life.  .  .  .  The  time  for  the  New  London  trip 
has  not  been  fixed  upon.  I  sincerely  wish  it  may 
wait  until  you  get  home  from  Cambridge  if  you 
would  like  to  go. 

The  cars  continue  thriving  —  a  good  many  passen- 
gers seem  to  arrive  from  somewhere,  though  nobody 
knows  from  where.  Father  expects  his  new  buggy 
to  arrive  by  the  cars  every  day  now,  and  that  will 
help  a  little.  I  expect  all  our  grandfathers  and  all 
their  country  cousins  will  come  here  to  spend  Com- 
mencement, and  don't  doubt  the  stock  will  rise 
several  per  cent  that  week.  If  we  children  could 
obtain  board  for  the  week  in  some  'vast  wilderness/ 


1853]     TO  MR   WILUAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON      II5 

I  think  we  should  have  good  times.  Our  house  is 
crowded  daily  with  the  members  of  this  world,  the 
high  and  the  low,  the  bond  and  the  free,  the  '  poor 
in  this  world's  goods,'  and  the  '  almighty  dollar ; ' 
and  what  in  the  world  they  are  after  continues  to  be 
unknown.  But  I  hope  they  will  pass  away  as  insects 
or  vegetation,  and  let  us  reap  together  in  golden 
harvest  time.  You  and  I  and  our  sister  Vinnie  must 
have  a  pleasant  time  to  be  unmolested  together  when 
your  school-days  end.  You  must  come  home  from 
school,  not  stopping  to  play  by  the  way.  .  .  .  We  all 
send  our  love  to  you,  and  miss  you  very  much,  and 
think  of  seeing  you  again  very  much.  Write  me 
again  soon.     I  have  said  a  good  deal  to-day. 

Emiue. 

The  new  railroad  was  opened  for  the  first 
regular  trip  from  Palmer  to  Amherst,  May  9, 
1853.  Mr  Edward  Dickinson  wrote  on  that 
day,  *  We  have  no  railroad  jubilee  till  we  see 
whether  all  moves  right,  then  we  shall  glorify 
becomingly.'  Everything  was  apparently  sat- 
isfactory, for  the  celebration  occurred  early  in 
June,  when  more  than  three  hundred  New 
London  people  visited  Amherst.  In  the  fol- 
lowing letter  from  Emily  are  indications  of  her 
growing  distaste  to  mingle  in  a  social  tniUey 
despite  genuine  interest  in  itself  and  its  cause. 


1 16  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1853 


[June  20, 1853.] 

Monday  Morning. 

My  dear  Austin,  —  ...  The  New  London  day 
passed  off  grandly,  so  all  the  people  said.  It  was 
pretty  hot  and  dusty,  but  nobody  cared  for  that. 
Father  was,  as  usual,  chief  marshal  of  the  day,  and 
went  marching  around  with  New  London  at  his  heels 
like  some  old  Roman  general  upon  a  triumph  day. 
Mrs  H.  got  a  capital  dinner,  and  was  very  much 
praised.  Carriages  flew  like  sparks,  hither  and 
thither  and  yon,  and  they  all  said  'twas  fine.  I 
'  spose '  it  was.  I  sat  in  Professor  Tyler's  woods  and 
saw  the  train  move  off,  and  then  came  home  again 
for  fear  somebody  would  see  me,  or  ask  me  how  I 
did.  Dr  Holland  was  here,  and  called  to  see  us  — 
was  very  pleasant  indeed,  inquired  for  you,  and 
asked  mother  if  Vinnie  and  I  might  come  and  see 
them  in  Springfield.  .  .  .  We  all  send  you  our  love. 

Emilie. 

[Postmarked,  July  2, 1853.] 

Friday  Afternoon. 

Dear  Austin,  —  ...  Some  of  the  letters  you  Ve 
sent  us  we  have  received,  and  thank  you  for  affec- 
tionately. Some  we  have  not  received,  but  thank 
you  for  the  memory,  of  which  the  emblem  perished. 
Where  all  those  letters  go,  yours  and  ours,  somebody 
surely  knows,  but  we  do  not.  There  's  a  new  post- 
master to-day,  but  we  don't  know  who 's  to  blame. 


1853]     TO  MR   WILUAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON     WJ 

You  never  wrote  me  a  letter,  Austin,  which  I  liked 

half  so  well  as  the  one  father  brought  me.    We  think 

of  your  coming  home  with  a  great  deal  of  happiness, 

and  are  glad  you  want  to  come. 

Father  said  he  never  saw  you  looking  in  better 

health  or  seeming  in  finer  spirits.     He  didn't  say 

a  word  about  the  Hippodrome  or  the  Museum,  and 

he  came  home  so  stem  that  none  of  us  dared  to  ask 

him,  and  besides  grandmother  was  here,  and  you 

certainly  don't  think  I  'd  allude  to  a  Hippodrome  in 

the  presence  of  that  lady  1     I  'd  as  soon  think  of 

popping  fire-crackers  in  the  presence  of  Peter  the 

Great.     But  you'll  tell  us  when  you  get  home  — 

how  soon  —  how  soon  !  .  .  .  I  admire  the  '  Poems  * 

very  much.    We  all  send  our  love  to  you  —  shall 

write  you  again  Sunday. 

Emilie. 

[Summer,  1853.] 

Sunday  Afternoon, 

...  It  is  cold  here  to-day,  Austin,  and  the  west 
wind  blows  —  the  windows  are  shut  at  home,  and 
the  fire  bums  in  the  kitchen.  How  we  should  love 
to  see  you  —  how  pleasant  it  would  be  to  walk  to 
the  grove  together.  We  will  walk  there  when  you 
get  home.  We  all  went  down  this  morning,  and  the 
trees  look  beautifiiUy — every  one  is  growing,  and 
when  the  west  wind  blows,  the  pines  lift  their  light 
leaves  and  make  sweet  music.  Pussy  goes  down 
there  too,  and  seems  to  enjoy  much  in  her  own 
observations. 


Il8  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1853 

Mr  Dwight  has  not  answered  yet ;  he  probably  will 

this  week.     I  do  think  he  will  come,  Austin,  and 

shall  be  so  glad  if  he  will.  .  .  .  We  all  wish  you  here 

always,  but  I  hope  *t  will  seem  only  dearer  for  missing 

it  so  long.    Father  says  you  will  come  in  three  weeks 

—  that  won't  be  long  now  —  keep  well  and  happy, 

Austin,  and  remember  us  all  you  can,  and  much  love 

from  home  and 

Emilie. 

Thursday  Evening. 

.  .  .  G.  H.  has  just  retired  from  an  evening's 
visit  here,  and  I  gather  my  spent  energies  to  write 
a  word  to  you. 

'  Blessed  are  they  that  are  persecuted  for  right- 
eousness* sake,  for  they  shall  have  their  reward !  * 
Dear  Austin,  I  don't  feel  funny,  and  I  hope  you 
won't  laugh  at  anything  I  say.  I  am  thinking  of 
you  and  Vinnie  —  what  nice  times  you  are  having, 
sitting  and  talking  together,  while  I  am  lonely  here, 
and  I  wanted  to  sit  and  think  of  you,  and  fancy 
what  you  were  saying,  all  the  evening  long,  but  — 
ordained  otherwise.  I  hope  you  will  have  grand 
times,  and  don't  forget  the  unit  without  you,  at 
home. 

I  have  had  some  things  from  you  to  which  I  per- 
ceive no  meaning.  They  either  were  very  vast,  or 
they  did  n't  mean  anything,  I  don't  know  certainly 
which.  What  did  you  mean  by  a  note  3rou  sent  me 
day  before  yesterday?    Father  asked  me  what  you 


*853l     TO  MR  WILUAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON     1 19 

wrote,  and  I  gave  it  to  bim  to  read.  He  looked  very 
much  confused,  and  finally  put  on  his  spectacles, 
which  did  n't  seem  to  help  him  much  —  I  don't 
think  a  telescope  would  have  assisted  him.  I  hope 
you  will  write  to  me  —  I  love  to  hear  from  you,  and 
now  Vinnie  is  gone  I  shall  feel  very  lonely.  .  .  . 
Love  for  them  all  if  there  are  those  to  love  and 
think  of  me,  and  more  and  most  for  you,  from 

Emily. 

Tuesday  Evening, 

Well,  Austin,  dear  Austin,  you  have  got  back 
again,  codfish  and  pork  and  all  —  all  but  the  slip- 
pers, so  nicely  wrapped  to  take,  yet  found  when 
you  were  gone  imder  the  kitchen  chair.  I  hope  you 
won't  want  them.  Perhaps  you  have  some  more 
there  —  I  will  send  them  by  opportunity,  should 
there  be  such  a  thing.  Vinnie  proposed  franking 
them,  but  I  fear  they  are  rather  large  !  What  should 
you  think  of  it  ?  It  is  n't  every  day  that  we  have  a 
chance  to  sponge  Congress,  .  .  .  but  Caesar  is  such 
'an  honorable  man '  that  we  may  all  go  to  the  poor- 
house  for  all  the  American  Congress  will  lift  a  finger 
to  help  us.  .  .  . 

The  usual  rush  of  callers,  and  this  beleaguered 
family  as  yet  in  want  of  time.  I  do  hope  im- 
mortality will  last  a  little  while,  but  if  the  A s 

should  happen  to  get  there  first,  we  shall  be  driven 
there.  .  .  . 

Emhje. 


120  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1854 


[March  17,  1854.] 

.  .  .  Since   you   went    back   to  Cambridge   the 
weather  has   been   wonderful,  —  the   thermometer 
every  noon  between  60  and   70  above  zero,  and 
'the  air  full  of  birds. 

To-day  has  not  seemed  like  a  day.  It  has  been 
most  unearthly,  —  so  mild,  so  bright,  so  still,  the 
windows  open,  and  fires  uncomfortable. 

Since  supper  it  lightens  frequently.  In  the  south 
you  can  see  the  lightning  —  in  the  north  the  north- 
em  lights.  Now  a  furious  wind  blows  just  from  the 
north  and  west,  and  winter  comes  back  again.  .  .  . 

There  is  to  be  a  party  at  Professor  Haven's  to- 
morrow night,  for  married  people  merely.  Celibacy 
excludes  me  and  my  sister.  Father  and  mother  are 
invited.  Mother  will  go.  .  .  .  Mother  and  Vinnie 
send  love.  They  are  both  getting  ready  for  Wash- 
ington.    Take  care  of  yourself. 

Emilie. 

Already  Emily  seems  to  have  exhibited  dis- 
inclination for  journeys,  as,  in  a  letter  to  his  son 
in  Cambridge,  dated  at  Washington,  March 
13,  1854,  Mr  Edward  Dickinson  said,  *I  have 
written  home  to  have  Lavinia  come  with  your 
mother  and  you,  and  Emily,  too,  if  she  will, 
but  that  I  will  not  insist  upon  her  coming.' 
Emily,  however,  did  go  to  Washington  with 
her  family,  later  in  the  spring,  as  a  subsequent 
letter  to  Mrs  Holland  will  show. 


i854l     TO  MR   WILLIAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON     121 

[Amherst,  March  27, 1854.] 

Sunday  Evening. 

Well,  Austin,  —  it's  Sunday  evening.  Vinnie  is 
sick  with  the  ague  —  mother  taking  a  tour  of  the 
second  story  as  she  is  wont.  Sabbath  evening  —  the 
wind  is  blowing  high,  the  weather  very  cold,  and  I 
am  rather  cast  down  in  view  of  all  these  circum- 
stances. ...  I  went  to  meeting  alone  all  day.  I 
assure  you  I  felt  very  solemn.  I  went  to  meeting 
five  minutes  before  the  bell  rang,  morning  and  after- 
noon, so  not  to  have  to  go  in  after  all  the  people 
had  got  there.  I  wish  you  had  heard  Mr  Dwight's 
sermons  to-day.  He  has  preached  wonderfully,  and 
I  thought  all  the  afternoon  how  I  wished  you  were 
there.  ...  I  will  tell  you  something  funny.  You 
know  Vinnie  sent  father  [at  Washington]  a  box  of 
maple  sugar  —  she  got  the  box  at  the  store,  and  it 
said  on  the  outside  of  it,  'i  doz.  genuine  Quaker 
Soap.'  We  did  n't  hear  from  the  box,  and  so  many 
days  passed  we  began  to  feel  anxious  lest  it  had  never 
reached  him ;  and  mother,  writing  soon,  alluded  in 
her  letter  to  the  'sugar  sent  by  the  girls,'  and  the 
funniest  letter  from  father  came  in  answer  to  hers. 
It  seems  the  box  went  straightway,  but  father  not 
knowing  the  hand,  merely  took  off  the  papers  in 
which  the  box  was  wrapped,  and  the  label  'Quaker 
Soap'  so  far  imposed  upon  him  that  he  put  the  box 
in  a  drawer  with  his  shaving  materials,  and  supposed 
himself  well  stocked  with  an  excellent  Quaker  Soap. 


122  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1854 

.  .  .  We  all  send  our  love  to  you,  and  want  you  should 
write  us  often.     Good-night,  from 

Emilie. 

.  .  .  The  Germanians  gave  a  concert  here  the 
evening  of  exhibition  day.  Vinnie  and  I  went  with 
J.  I  never  heard  sounds  before.  They  seemed  like 
brazen  robms,  all  wearing  broadcloth  wings,  and  I 
think  they  were,  for  they  all  flew  away  as  soon  as 
the  concert  was  over. 

[Late  Spring,  1854.] 

Saturday  Noon, 

Dear  Axjstin,  —  I  rather  thought  from  your  letter 
to  me  that  my  essays,  together  with  the  lectures  at 
Cambridge,  were  too  much  for  you,  so  I  thought 
I  would  let  you  have  a  little  vacation;  but  you 
must  have  got  rested  now,  so  I  shall  renew  the 
series.  Father  was  very  severe  to  me ;  he  thought 
I  *d  been  trifling  with  you,  so  he  gave  me  quite  a 
trimming  about  *  Uncle  Tom '  and  '  Charles  Dickens  * 
and  these  '  modem  literati  *  who,  he  says,  are  noth- 
ing, compared  to  past  generations  who  flourished 
when  he  was  a  boy.  Then  he  said  there  were  '  some- 
body's rev-e-ries,'  he  did  n't  know  whose  they  were, 
that  he  thought  were  very  ridiculous  —  so  I  'm  quite 
in  disgrace  at  present,  but  I  think  of  that '  pinnacle ' 
on  which  you  always  mount  when  anybody  insults 
you,  and  that 's  quite  a  comfort  to  me.  .  .  . 


1854]      TO  MR  WILUAM  AUSTIN  DICKINSON     12 3 

After  a  page  or  two  of  information  about 
friends  in  the  village,  the  letter  continues : 

This  is  all  the  news  I  can  think  of,  but  there  is 
one  old  story,  Austin,  which  you  may  like  to  hear  — 
it  is  that  we  think  about  you  the  whole  of  the  live- 
long day,  and  talk  of  you  when  we  're  together. 
And  you  can  recollect  when  you  are  busy  studying 
that  those  of  us  at  home  not  so  hard  at  work  as  you 
are,  get  much  time  to  be  with  you.     We  all  send 

our  love  to  you. 

Emiue. 

[Amherst,  May,  1854.] 

Saturday  Morn, 

Dear  Austin,  —  A  week  ago  we  were  all  here  — 
to-day  we  are  not  all  here  —  yet  the  bee  hums  just 
as  merrily,  and  all  the  busy  things  work  on  as  if  the 
same.  They  do  not  miss  you,  child,  but  there  is  a 
humming-bee  whose  song  is  not  so  merry,  and  there 
are  busy  ones  who  pause  to  drop  a  tear.  Let  us 
thank  God,  to-day,  Austin,  that  we  can  love  our 
friends,  our  brothers  and  our  sisters,  and  weep  when 
they  are  gone,  and  smile  at  their  return.  It  is 
indeed  a  joy  which  we  are  blest  to  know. 

To-day  is  very  beautiful — just  as  bright,  just  as 
blue,  just  as  green  and  as  white  and  as  crimson  as 
the  cherry-trees  full  in  bloom,  and  the  half-opening 
peach-blossoms,  and  the  grass  just  waving,  and  sky 
and  hill  and  cloud  can  make  it,  if  they  try.     How  I 


124  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1854 

wish  you  were  here,  Austin ;  you  thought  last  Satur- 
day beautiful,  yet  to  this  golden  day  't  was  but  one 
single  gem  to  whole  handfuls  of  jewels.  You  will 
ride  to-day,  I  hope,  or  take  a  long  walk  somewhere, 
and  recollect  us  all,  —  Vinnie  and  me  and  father 
and  mother  and  home.  Yes,  Austin,  every  one  of 
us,  for  we  all  think  of  you,  and  bring  you  to  recol- 
lection many  times  each  day  —  not  bring  you  to 
recollection,  for  we  never  put  you  away,  but  keep 
recollecting  on.  .  .  . 

You  must  think  of  us  to-night  while  Mr  Dwight 
takes  tea  here,  and  we  will  think  of  you  far  away 
down  in  Cambridge. 

Don't  mind  the  can,  Austin,  if  it  is  rather  dry, 
don't  mind  the  daily  road  though  it  is  rather  dusty, 
but  remember  the  brooks  and  the  hills,  and  re- 
member while  you  're  but  one,  we  are  but  four  at 

home ! 

Emilie. 


CHAPTER  III 

To  Mrs  Gordon  L,  Ford,  Mr  Bowdoin,  Mrs 
Anthon^  and  Miss  Lavinia  Dickinson 

WITH  a  number  of  early  letters  to  herself, 
Mrs  Ford  of  Brooklyn  sent  me  also  a 
short  sketch  of  her  remembrance  of  Emily 
Dickinson's  girlhood,  which  seems  to  show 
her  in  a  somewhat  different  aspect  from  any- 
thing which  other  friends  have  given. 

Mrs  Ford  was  a  daughter  of  the  late  Pro- 
fessor Fowler  of  Amherst  College,  and  her 
recollections,  making  a  pleasant  picture  of  life 
in  Amherst  nearly  fifty  years  ago,  have  all  the 
charm  of  early  friendship  and  intercourse  in 
the  days  when  plain  living  and  high  thinking 
were  not  an  exceptional  combination. 

In  speaking  of  several  letters  which  she 
could  not  find,  Mrs  Ford  wrote,  *  The  other 
things  which  I  wish  I  could  put  my  hand  on 
were  funny  —  sparkling  with  fun,  and  that 
is  a  new  phase  to  the  public;  but  she  cer- 
tainly began  as  a  humorist.'  Although  sent 
to  me  for  publication  in  this  volume  of  Letters^ 


126  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON 

Mrs  Ford  had  hoped  to  revise  and  perhaps 
shorten  the  sketch  in  the  proof;  and  her  sud- 
den death,  within  a  few  days  after  writing  it, 
lends  a  saddened  interest  to  these  memories  of 
a  vanished  friendship. 

*My  remembrances  of  my  friend  Emily 
Dickinson  are  many  and  vivid,  and  delightful 
to  me  personally,  yet  they  are  all  of  trifles  in 
themselves,  and  only  interesting  to  the  general 
public  as  they  cast  light  on  the  growth  and 
changes  in  her  soul. 

*  Our  parents  were  friends,  and  we  knew  each 
other  from  childhood,  but  she  was  several  years 
younger,  and  how  and  when  we  drew  together 
I  cannot  recall,  but  I  think  the  friendship  was 
based  on  certain  sympathies  and  mutual  ad- 
mirations of  beauty  in  nature  and  ideas.  She 
loved  the  great  aspects  of  nature,  and  yet  was 
full  of  interest  and  affection  for  its  smaller 
details.  We  often  walked  together  over  the 
lovely  hills  of  Amherst,  and  I  remember 
especially  two  excursions  to  Mount  Norwot- 
tock,  five  miles  away,  where  we  found  the 
climbing  fern,  and  came  home  laden  with 
pink  and  white  trilliums,  and  later,  yellow 
lady's-slippers.  She  knew  the  wood-lore  of 
the  region  round  about,  and  could  name  the 
haunts  and  the  habits  of  every  wild  or  garden 


MRS  GORDON  L,  FORD  12/ 

growth  within  her  reach.  Her  eyes  were  wide 
open  to  nature's  sights,  and  her  ears  to  nature's 
voices. 

*  My  chief  recollections  of  her  are  connected 
with  these  woodland  walks,  or  out-door  excur- 
sions with  a  merry  party,  perhaps  to  Sunder- 
land for  the  **  sugaring  off"  of  the  maple  sap, 
or  to  some  wild  brook  in  the  deeper  forest, 
where  the  successful  fishermen  would  after- 
ward cook  the  chowder.  She  was  a  free 
talker  about  what  interested  her,  yet  I  cannot 
remember  one  personal  opinion  expressed  of 
her  mates,  her  home,  or  her  habits. 

*  Later  we  met  to  discuss  books.  The 
Atlantic  Monthly  was  a  youngster  then,  and 
our  joy  over  a  new  poem  by  Lowell,  Long- 
fellow, and  Whittier,  our  puzzles  over  Emer- 
son's "  If  the  red  slayer  think  he  slays," 
our  laughter  at  Oliver  Wendell  Holmes,  were 
full  and  satisfying.  Lowell  was  especially 
dear  to  us,  and  once  I  saw  a  passionate  fit  of 
crying  brought  on,  when  a  tutor  of  the 
College,  who  died  while  contesting  the  sena- 
torship  for  Louisiana,^  told  us  from  his  eight 
years  of  seniority,  that  "Byron  had  a  much 

1  The  Hon.  Henry  M.  Spofford,  Justice  of  the  Supreme 
Court  of  Louisiana,  a  graduate  of  Amherst  College  in  the 
Class  of  1840,  and  brother  of  Mr  Ainsworth  R.  Spofford,  the 
Librarian  of  Congress. 


128  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON 

better  style,"  and  advised  us  "  to  leave  Lowell, 
Motherwell  and  Emerson  alone."  Like  other 
young  creatures,  we  were  ardent  partisans. 

'There  was  a  fine  circle  of  young  people 
in  Amherst,  and  we  influenced  each  other 
strongly.  We  were  in  the  adoring  mood,  and 
I  am  glad  to  say  that  many  of  those  idols  of 
our  girlhood  have  proved  themselves  golden. 
The  eight  girls  who  composed  this  group  had 
talent  enough  for  t&gt;yice  their  number,  and  in 
their  respective  spheres  of  mothers,  authors 
or  women,  have  been  noteworthy  and  admi- 
rable. Three  of  them  have  passed  from  earth, 
but  the  others  live  in  activity  and  usefulness. 

'This  group  started  a  little  paper  in  the 
Academy,  now  the  village  High  School,  which 
was  kept  up  for  two  years.  Emily  Dickinson 
was  one  of  the  wits  of  the  school,  and  a 
humorist  of  the  "  comic  column."  Fanny 
Montague  often  made  the  head  title  of  the 
paper  —  Forest  Leaves  —  in  leaves  copied 
from  nature,  and  fantasies  of  her  own  pen- 
work.  She  is  now  a  wise  member  of  art 
circles  in  Baltimore,  a  manager  of  the  Museum 
of  Art,  and  the  appointed  and  intelligent  critic 
of  the  Japanese  exhibit  at  the  Exposition  in 
Chicago.  Helen  Fiske  (the  "  H.  H."  of  later 
days)  did  no  special  work  on  the  paper  for 
various  reasons. 


MRS  GORDON  L.  FORD  1 29 

*  This  paper  was  all  in  script,  and  was  passed 
around  the  school,  where  the  contributions 
were  easily  recognized  from  the  handwriting, 
which  in  Emily's  case  was  very  beautiful  — 
small,  clear,  and  finished.  Later,  though  her 
writing  retained  its  elegance,  it  became  diffi- 
cult to  read.  I  wish  very  much  I  could  find 
a  copy  of  Forest  Leaves^  but  we  recklessly 
gave  the  numbers  away,  and  the  last  one  I 
ever  saw  turned  up  at  the  Maplewood  Insti- 
tute in  Pittsfield,  Massachusetts,  where  they 
started  a  similar  paper.  Emily's  contributions 
were  irresistible,  but  I  cannot  recall  them. 
One  bit  was  stolen  by  a  roguish  editor  for  the 
College  paper,  where  her  touch  was  instantly 
recognized ;  and  there  were  two  paragraphs  in 
The  Springfield  Republican, 

*  We  had  a  Shakespeare  Club  —  a  rare  thing 
in  those  days,  —  and  one  of  the  tutors  pro- 
posed to  take  all  the  copies  of  all  the  members 
and  mark  out  the  questionable  passages.  This 
plan  was  negatived  at  the  first  meeting,  as  far 
as  "  the  girls "  spoke,  who  said  they  did  not 
want  the  strange  things  emphasized,  nor  their 
books  spoiled  with  marks.  Finally  we  told 
the  men  to  do  as  they  liked  —  "we  shall  read 
everything."  I  remember  the  lofty  air  with 
which    Emily    took    her    departure,    saying, 

"  There 's  nothing  wicked  in  Shakespeare,  and 
VOL.  I. —  9 


130  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON 

if  there  is  I  don't  want  to  know  it."  The  men 
read  for  perhaps  three  meetings  from  their 
expurgated  editions,  and  then  gave  up  their 
plan,  and  the  whole  text  was  read  out  boldly. 

*  There  were  many  little  dances,  with  cake 
and  lemonade  at  the  end,  and  one  year  there 
was  a  valentine  party,  where  the  lines  of  vari- 
ous authors  were  arranged  to  make  apparent 
sense,  but  absolute  nonsense,  the  play  being 
to  guess  the  names  and  places  of  the  misap- 
propriated lines. 

'Emily  was  part  and  parcel  of  all  these 
gatherings,  and  there  were  no  signs,  in  her 
life  and  character,  of  the  future  recluse.  As  a 
prophetic  hint,  she  once  asked  me  if  it  did  not 
make  me  shiver  to  hear  a  great  many  people 
talk  —  they  took  "  all  the  clothes  off  their  souls  " 
—  and  we  discussed  this  matter.  She  mingled 
freely  in  all  the  companies  and  excursions  of 
the  moment,  and  the  evening  frolics. 

*  Several  of  this  group  had  beauty,  all  had 
intelligence  and  character,  and  others  had 
charm.  Emily  was  not  beautiful,  yet  she  had 
great  beauties.  Her  eyes  were  lovely  auburn, 
soft  and  warm,  her  hair  lay  in  rings  of  the  same 
color  all  over  her  head,  and  her  skin  and  teeth 
were  fine.  At  this  time  she  had  a  demure 
manner  which  brightened  easily  into  fun 
where  she  felt  at  home,  but  among  strangers 


MRS  GORDON  L,  FORD  1 3 1 

she  was  rather  shy,  silent,  and  even  depreca- 
ting. She  was  exquisitely  neat  and  careful  in 
her  dress,  and  always  had  flowers  about  her, 
another  pleasant  habit  of  modernity. 

*  I  have  so  many  times  seen  her  in  the 
morning  at  work  in  her  garden  where  every- 
thing throve  under  her  hand,  and  wandering 
there  at  eventide,  that  she  is  perpetually  asso- 
ciated in  my  mind  with  flowers  —  a  flower 
herself,  —  especially  as  for  years  it  was  her 
habit  to  send  me  the  first  buds  of  the  arbutus 
which  we  had  often  hung  over  together  in  the 
woods,  joying  in  its  fresh  fragrance  as  the  very 
breath  of  coming  spring. 

'My  busy  married  life  separated  me  from 
these  friends  of  my  youth,  and  intercourse 
with  them  has  not  been  frequent ;  but  I  rejoice 
that  my  early  years  were  passed  in  scenes  of 
beautiful  nature,  and  with  these  mates  of 
simple  life,  high  cultivation  and  noble  ideals. 
In  Emily  as  in  others,  there  was  a  rare  com- 
bination of  fervor  and  simplicity,  with  good 
practical  living,  great  conscience  and  direct- 
ness of  purpose.  She  loved  with  all  her 
might,  there  was  never  a  touch  of  the  world- 
ling about  her,  and  we  all  knew  and  trusted 
her  love. 

*  Dr  Holland  once  said  to  me,  "  Her  poems 
are  too  ethereal  for  publication."     I  replied, 


132  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON 

"They  are  beautiful  —  so  concentrated — but 
they  remind  me  of  air-plants  that  have  no 
roots  in  earth."  "  That  is  true,"  he  said,  "  a 
perfect  description ;  "  and  I  think  these  lyrical 
ejaculations,  these  breathed-out  projectiles, 
sharp  as  lances,  would  at  that  time  have  fallen 
into  idle  ears.  But  gathered  in  a  volume 
where  many  could  be  read  at  once  as  her 
philosophy  of  life,  they  explain  each  other, 
and  so  become  intelligible  and  delightful  to 
the  public. 

*The  first  poem  I  ever  read  was  the  robin 
chorister^  (published  in  the  first  volume) 
which  she  gave  my  husband  years  ago.  I 
think  in  spite  of  her  seclusion,  she  was  longing 
for  poetic  sympathy,  and  that  some  of  her 
later  habits  of  life  originated  in  this  suppressed 
and  ungratified  desire. 

*  I  only  wish  the  interest  and  delight  her 
poems  have  aroused  could  have  come  early 
enough  in  her  career  to  have  kept  her  social 
and  communicative,  and  at  one  with  her 
friends.  Still,  these  late  tributes  to  her  mem- 
ory are  most  welcome  to  the  circle  that  loved 
her,  even  though  they  are  but  laurels  to  lay  on 

her  grave. 

'  E.  E.  F.  F.' 

1  *  Some  keep  the  Sabbath  going  to  church,  etc.* — Poems , 
First  Series,  page  74. 


1848]  TO  MRS  GORDON  L.  FORD  1 33 

The  first  letter  was  written  in  1848;  the 
others  at  intervals  until  1853.  Though  placed 
in  order,  they  were  not  dated  by  Mrs  Ford. 

[1848.] 

Dear  Emily,  —  I  said  when  the  barber  came  I 
would  save  you  a  little  lock,  and  fulfilling  my  prom- 
ise, I  send  you  one  to-day.  I  shall  never  give  you 
anything  again  that  will  be  half  so  full  of  sunshine 
as  this  wee  lock  of  hair,  but  I  wish  no  hue  more 
sombre  might  ever  fall  to  you. 

All  your  gifts  should  be  rainbows  if  I  owned  half 
the  shine,  and  but  a  bit  of  sea  to  furnish  raindrops 
for  one.  Dear  Emily,  this  is  all  —  it  will  serve  to 
make  you  remember  me  when  locks  are  crisp  and 
gray,  and  the  quiet  cap,  and  the  spectacles,  and 
*  John  Anderson  my  Jo  '  are  all  that  is  left  of  you. 

I  must  have  one  of  yours.    Please  spare  me  a  little 

lock  sometime  when  you   have   your  scissors   and 

there  is  one  to  spare. 

Your  very  affectionate 

Emiue. 

The   buds   are   small,  dear   Emily,  but  will  you 

please  accept  one  for  your  cousin  and  yourself?     I 

quite  forgot  the  rosebugs  when  I  spoke  of  the  buds, 

last  evening,  and  I  found  a  family  of  them  taking  an 

early  breakfast  on  my  most  precious  bud,  with  a 

smart  little  worm  for  landlady,  so  the  sweetest  are 

gone,  but  accept  my  love  with  the  smallest,  and  I  'm 

Your  affectionate 

Emilie. 


134  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  ti849 

Tuesday  Morn. 

Dear  Emily,  —  I  come  and  see  you  a  great  many 

times  every  day,  though  I  don*t  bring  my  body  with 

me,  so  perhaps  you  don't  know  I  *m  there.     But  I 

love  to  come  just  as  deariy,  for  nobody  sees  me  then, 

and  I  sit  and  chat  away,  and  look  up  in  your  face, 

and  no  matter  who  calls  if  *  my  Lord  the  King,'  he 

does  n't  interrupt  me.    Let  me  say,  dear  Emily,  both 

mean  to  come  at  a  time,  so  you  shall  be  very  sure  I 

am  sitting  by  your  side,  and  not  have  to  trust  the 

fancy.  .  .  . 

Affectionately, 

E. 

[1849?] 

TTiursday  Morning. 

Dear  Emily,  —  I  fear  you  will  be  lonely  this  dark 
and  stormy  day,  and  I  send  this  little  messenger  to 
say  you  must  not  be. 

The  day  is  long  to  me.  I  have  wanted  to  come 
and  see  you.  I  have  tried  earnestly  to  come,  but 
always  have  been  detained  by  some  ungenerous  care, 
and  now  this  falling  snow  sternly  and  silently  lifts  up 
its  hand  between. 

How  glad  I  am  affection  can  always  leave  and  go. 
How  glad  that  the  drifts  of  snow  pause  at  the  outer 
door  and  go  no  farther,  and  it  is  as  warm  within  as 
if  no  winter  came.  .  .  .  Let  us  think  of  the  pleas- 
ant summer  whose  gardens  are  far  away,  and  whose 
robins  are  singing  always.  If  it  were  not  for  blos- 
soms .  .  .  and   for  that  brighter  sunshine  above, 


f849]  TO  MRS  GORDON  L,  FORD  1 35 

beyond^  away,  these  days  were  dark  indeed ;  but  I 
try  to  keep  recollecting  that  we  are  away  from  home, 
and  have  many  brothers  and  sisters  who  are  expect- 
ing ns.  Dear  Emilie,  don't  weep,  for  you  will  both 
be  so  happy  where  *  sorrow  cannot  come.' 

Vinnie  left  her  Testament  on  a  little  stand  in  our 
room,  and  it  made  me  think  of  her,  so  I  thought  I 
would  open  it,  and  the  first  words  I  read  were  in 
those  sweetest  verses,  *  Blessed  are  the  poor  — 
Blessed  are  they  that  mourn —  Blessed  are  they  that 
weep,  for  they  shall  be  comforted.*  Dear  Emily,  I 
thought  of  you,  and  I  hastened  away  to  send  this 

message  to  you. 

Emiue. 

TTiursday  Morn. 

Dear  Emily,  —  I  can't  come  in  this  morning,  be- 
cause I  am  so  cold,  but  you  will  know  I  am  here 
ringing  the  big  front  door-bell,  and  leaving  a  note 
for  you. 

Oh,  I  want  to  come  in,  I  have  a  great  mind  now 
to  follow  little  Jane  into  your  warm  sitting-room ; 
are  you  there,  dear  Emily? 

No,  I  resist  temptation  and  run  away  from  the 

door  just  as  fast  as  my  feet  will  carry  me,  lest  if  I 

once  come  in  I  shall  grow  so  happy  that  I  shall  stay 

there  always  and  never  go  home  at  all.    You  will 

have  read  this  note  by  the  time  I  reach  the  office^ 

and  you  can't  think  how  fast  I  run. 

Affectionately, 

Emily. 


136  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1849 

P.  S.  I  have  just  shot  past  the  comer,  and  now 
all  the  wayside  houses,  and  the  little  gate  flies  open 
to  see  me  coming  home. 

Saturday  Mom, 

It  has  been  a  long  week,  dear  Emily,  for  I  have 
not  seen  your  face,  but  I  have  contrived  to  think  of 
you  very  much  instead,  which  has  half  reconciled 
me  to  not  seeing  you  for  so  long.  I  was  coming 
several  times,  but  the  snow  would  start  the  first,  and 
then  the  paths  were  damp,  and  then  a  friend  would 
drop  in  to  chat,  and  the  short  afternoon  was  gone 
before  I  was  aware. 

Did  Mr  D give  you  a  message  from  me  ?    He 

promised  to  be  faithful,  but  I  don't  suppose  divines 

think   earthly   loves   of    much    consequence.      My 

flowers  come  in  my  stead  to-day,  dear  Emily.     I 

hope  you  will  love  to  see  them,  and  whatever  word 

of  love  or  welcome  kindly  you  would  extend  to  me, 

'  do  even  so  to  them/     They  are  small,  but  so  full  of 

meaning  if  they  only  mean  the  half  of  what  I  bid 

them. 

Very  affectionately, 

Emily. 

Thursday  Morning, 

.  .  .  When  I  am  as  old  as  you,  and  have  had  so 
many  friends,  perhaps  they  won't  seem  so  precious, 
and  then  I  sha'n't  write  any  more  little  billets-doux 
like  these,  but  you  will  forgive  me  now,  because  I 
can't  find  many  so  dear  to  me  as  you.  Then  I  know 
I  can't  have  you  always;  some  day  a  *  brave  dra- 


iSso]  TO  MR  BOWDOIN  1 37 

goon  *  will  be  stealing  you  away,  and  I  will  have 
farther  to  go  to  discover  you  at  all,  so  I  shall  recol- 
lect all  these  sweet  opportunities,  and  feel  so  sorry  if 
I  did  n't  improve  them.  ... 

About  this  time  (December,  1849),  the  fol- 
lowing little  note  was  sent  to  Mr  Bowdoin,  a 
law  student  in  Mr  Dickinson's  office,  *  on  re- 
turning Jane  Eyre,  The  leaves  mentioned 
were  box  leaves.' 

[December,  1849.] 

Mr  Bowdoin,  —  If  all  these  leaves  were  altars, 
and  on  every  one  a  prayer  that  Currer  Bell  might  be 
saved,  and  you  were  God  —  would  you  answer  it  ? 

Mr  Bowdoin,  who  was  considered  by  the 
young  girls  at  that  time  'a  confirmed  bache- 
lor,* also  received  the  accompanying  valentine 

from  Emily. 

Valentine  Week  [1850]. 

Awake,  ye  muses  nine,  sing  me  a  strain  divine, 
Unwind  the  solemn  twine,  and  tie  my  Valentine. 

Oh  the  earth  was  made  for  lovers,  for  damsel,  and 

hopeless  swain, 
For  sighing,  and  gentle  whispering,  and  unity  made 

of  twain. 
All  things  do  go  a  courting,  in  earth  or  sea,  or  air, 
God  hath  made  nothing  single  but  thee  in  His  world 

so  fair ! 


138  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1850 

The  bride  and  then  the  bridegroom^  the  two^  and 

then  the  oncy 
Adam,  and  Eve,  his  consort,  the  moon  and  then  the 

sun; 
The  life  doth  prove  the  precept,  who  obey  shall 

happy  be, 
Who  will  not  serve  the  sovereign,  be  hanged  on  fatal 

tree. 
The  high  do  seek  the  lowly,  the  great  do  seek  the 

small, 
None  cannot  find  who  seeketh,  on  this  terrestrial 

ball; 
The  bee  doth  court  the  flower,  the  flower  his  suit 

receives, 
And  they  make  a  merry  wedding,  whose  guests  are 

hundred  leaves ; 
The  wind  doth  woo  the  branches,  the  branches  they 

are  won, 
And  the  father  fond  demandeth  the  maiden  for  his 

son. 
The  storm  doth  walk  the  seashore  humming  a  mourn- 
ful tune. 
The  wave  with  eye  so  pensive,  looketh  to  see  the 

moon, 
Their  spirits  meet  together,  they  make  them  solemn 

vows. 
No  more  he  singeth  mournful,  her  sadness  she  doth 

lose. 
The  worm  doth  woo  the  mortal,  death  claims  a  living 

bride. 


1850]  TO  MR  BOWDOIN  1 39 

Night  unto  day  is  married,  morn  unto  eventide ; 
Earth  is  a  merry  damsel,  and  heaven  a  knight  so 

true, 
And  Earth  is  quite  coquettish,  and  beseemeth  in  vain 

to  sue. 
Now  to  the  appHcation,  to  the  reading  of  the  roll, 
To  bringing  thee  to  justice,  and  marshalling  thy  soul : 
Thou  art  a  human  solo,  a  being  cold,  and  lone. 
Wilt  have  no  kind  companion,  thou  reapest  what 

thou  hast  sown. 
Hast  never  silent  hours,  and  minutes  all  too  long, 
And  a  deal  of  sad  reflection,  and  wailing  instead  of 

song? 
There  *s  Sarah,  and  Eliza,  and  Emeline  so  fair, 
And  Harriet  and  Sabra,  and  she  with  curling  hair. 
Thine  eyes  are  sadly  blinded,  but  yet  thou  mayest 

see 
Six  true  and  comely  maidens  sitting  upon  the  tree  ; 
Approach  that  tree  with  caution,  then  up  it  boldly 

climb, 
And  seize  the  one  thou  lovest,  nor  care  for  space,  or 

time. 
Then  bear  her  to  the  greenwood,  and  build  for  her 

a  bower, 
And  give  her  what  she  asketh,  jewel,  or  bird,  or 

flower  — 
And  bring  the  fife,  and  trumpet,  and  beat  upon  the 

drum  — 
And  bid  the  world  Goodmorrow,  and  go  to  glory 

home ! 


140  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1852 

Valentines  seemed  ever  near  the  thoughts 
of  the  young  people  of  this  generation,  and 
another  clever  one,  written  by  Emily  in  1852, 
somehow  found  its  way  into  The  Republican^ 
probably  through  some  friend.  It  was  origi- 
nally sent  to  Mr  William  Rowland. 

[1852.] 

Sic  transit  gloria  mundi. 
How  doth  the  busy  bee  — 
Dum  vivimus  vivamus, 
I  stay  mine  enemy. 

Oh,  veni,  vidiy  vici^ 
Oh,  caputs  cap-a-pie, 
And  oh,  memento  mori 
When  I  am  far  from  thee. 

Hurrah  for  Peter  Parley, 
Hurrah  for  Daniel  Boone, 
Three  cheers,  sir,  for  the  gentlemen 
Who  first  observed  the  moon. 

Peter  put  up  the  sunshine, 
Pattie  arrange  the  stars, 
Tell  Luna  tea  is  waiting. 
And  call  your  brother  Mars. 

Put  down  the  apple,  Adam, 
And  come  away  with  me ; 
So  shall  thou  have  a  pippin 
From  off  my  father's  tree. 


185a]  TO  MR   WILLIAM  HOWLAND  I41 

I  dimb  the  hill  of  science 
I '  view  the  landscape  o'er/ 
Such  transcendental  prospect 
I  ne'er  beheld  before. 

Unto  the  Legislature 
My  country  bids  me  go. 
I  '11  take  my  india-rubbers, 
In  case  the  wind  should  blow. 

During  my  education, 
It  was  announced  to  me 
That  gravitation,  stumbling. 
Fell  from  an  apple-tree. 

The  earth  upon  its  axis 
Was  once  supposed  to  turn, 
By  way  of  a  gymnastic 
In  honor  to  the  sun. 

It  was  the  brave  Columbus, 
A-sailing  on  the  tide. 
Who  notified  the  nations 
Of  where  I  would  reside. 

Mortality  is  fatal. 
Gentility  is  fine. 
Rascality  heroic. 
Insolvency  sublime. 

Our  fathers  being  weary 
Lay  down  on  Bunker  Hill, 
And  though  full  many  a  morning, 
Yet  they  are  sleeping  still. 


142  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [185a 

The  trumpet,  sir,  shall  wake  them. 
In  dream  I  see  them  rise. 
Each  with  a  solemn  musket 
A-marching  to  the  skies. 

A  coward  will  remain,  sir. 
Until  the  fight  is  done. 
But  an  immortal  hero 
Will  take  his  hat  and  run. 

Good-by,  sir,  I  am  going  — 
My  country  calleth  me. 
Allow  me,  sir,  at  parting 
To  wipe  my  weeping  e'e. 

In  token  of  our  friendship 
Accept  this  Bonnie  Doon, 
And  when  the  hand  that  plucked  it 
Has  passed  beyond  the  moon, 

The  memory  of  my  ashes 
Will  consolation  be. 
Then  farewell,  Tuscarora, 
And  farewell,  sir,  to  thee. 

To  Mrs  Ford 

Sunday  Afternoon  [1852]. 

I  have  just  come  home  from  meeting,  where  I 
have  been  all  day,  and  it  makes  me  so  happy  to 
think  of  writing  you  that  I  forget  the  sermon  and 


185a]  TO  MRS  GORDON  L.  FORD  1 43 

minister  and  all^  and  think  of  none  but  you.  .  .  . 
I  miss  you  always,  dear  Emily,  and  I  think  now  and 
then  that  I  can't  stay  without  you,  and  half  make 
up  my  mind  to  make  a  little  bundle  of  all  my  earthly 
things,  bid  my  blossoms  and  home  good-by,  and  set 
out  on  foot  to  find  you.  But  we  have  so  much 
matter  of  fact  here  that  I  don't  dare  to  go,  so  I  keep 
on  sighing,  and  wishing  you  were  here. 

I  know  you  would  be  happier  amid  this  darling 
spring  than  in  ever  so  kind  a  city,  and  you  would  get 
well  much  faster  drinking  our  morning  dew  —  and 
the  world  here  is  so  beautiful,  and  things  so  sweet 
and  fair,  that  your  heart  would  be  soothed  and 
comforted. 

I  would  tell  you  about  the  spring  if  I  thought  it 
might  persuade  you  even  now  to  return,  but  every 
bud  and  bird  would  only  afflict  you  and  make  you 
sad  where  you  are,  so  not  one  word  of  the  robins, 
and  not  one  word  of  the  bloom,  lest  it  make  the 
city  darker,  and  your  own  home  more  dear. 

But  nothing  forgets  you,  Emily,  not  a  blossom,  not 
a  bee ;  for  in  the  merriest  flower  there  is  a  pensive 
air,  and  in  the  bonniest  bee  a  sorrow  —  they  know 
that  you  are  gone,  they  know  how  well  you  loved 
them,  and  in  their  little  faces  is  sadness,  and  in  their 
mild  eyes,  tears.  But  another  spring,  dear  friend, 
you  must  and  shall  be  here,  and  nobody  can  take 
you  away,  for  I  will  hide  you  and  keep  you  —  and 
who  would  think  of  taking  you  if  I  hold  you  tight  in 
my  arms? 


144  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1852 

Your  home  looks  very  silent  —  I  try  to  think  of 
things  funny,  and  turn  the  other  way  when  I  am 
passing  near,  for  sure  I  am  that  looking  would  make 
my  heart  too  heavy,  and  make  my  eyes  so  dim. 
How  I  do  long  once  more  t'-  liv^ai  the  household 
voices,  and  see  you  there  at  twilight  sitting  in  the 
door  —  and  I  shall  when  the  leaves  fall,  sha'n't  I, 
and  the  crickets  begin  to  sing? 

You  must  not  think  sad  thoughts,  dear  Emily. 
I  fear  you  are  doing  so,  from  your  sweet  note  to  me, 
and  it  almost  breaks  my  heart  to  have  you  so  far 
away,  where  I  cannot  comfort  you. 

All  will  be  well,  I  know,  and  I  know  all  will  be 

happy,  and  I  so  wish  I  was  near  to  convince  my 

dear  friend  so.     I  want  very  much  to  hear  how  Mr 

Ford  is  now.     I  hope  you  will  tell  me,  for  it's  a 

good  many  weeks  since  I  have  known  anything  of 

him.     You  and  he  may  come  this  way  any  summer ; 

and  how  I  hope  he  may  —  and  I  shall  pray  for  him, 

and  for  you,  and  for  your  home  on  earth,  which  will 

be  next  the  one  in  heaven. 

Your  very  aifectionate, 

Emiue. 

I  thank  you  for  writing  me,  one  precious  little 
'forget-me-not'  to  bloom  along  my  way.  But  one 
little  one  is  lonely  —  pray  send  it  a  blue-eyed  mate, 
that  it  be  not  alone.  Here  is  love  from  mother  and 
father  and  Vinnie  and  me.  .  .  . 


i8s3l  TO  MRS  GORDON  L.  PORD  145 


[i8S3-] 

Wednesday  Eve, 

Dear  Emily, — Are  you  there,  and  shall  you  always 
stay  there,  and  is, J);  pot  dear  Emily  any  more,  but 
Mrs  Ford  of  Connecticut,  and  must  we  stay  alone, 
and  will  you  not  come  back  with  the  birds  and  the 
butterflies,  when  the  days  grow  long  and  warm  ? 

Dear  Emily,  we  are  lonely  here.     I  know  Col. 

S is  left,  and  Mr  and  Mrs  K ,  but  pussy  has 

run  away,  and  you  do  not  come  back  again,  and  the 
world  has  grown  so  long !  I  knew  you  would  go 
away,  for  I  know  "the  roses  are  gathered,  but  I 
guessed  not  yet,  not  till  by  expectation  we  had 
become  resigned.  Dear  Emily,  when  it  came,  and 
hidden  by  your  veil  you  stood  before  us  all  and 
made  those  promises,  and  when  we  kissed  you,  all, 
and  went  back  to  our  homes,  it  seemed  to  me  trans- 
lation, not  any  earthly  thing,  and  if  a  little  after  you  *d 
ridden  on  the  wind,  it  would  not  have  surprised  me. 

And  now  five  days  have  gone,  Emily,  and  long 
and  silent,  and  I  begin  to  know  that  you  will  not 
come  back  again.  There's  a  verse  in  the  Bible, 
Emily,  I  don't  know  where  it  is,  nor  just  how  it  goes 
can  I  remember, but  it's  a  little  like  this — 'I  can  go 
to  her,  but  she  cannot  come  back  to  me.*  I  guess 
that  is  n't  right,  but  my  eyes  are  full  of  tears,  and 
I  *m  sure  I  do  not  care  if  I  make  mistakes  or  not. 
Is  it  happy  there,  dear  Emily,  and  is  the  fireside 

VOL.  I.  — 10 


146  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1859 

warm,  and  have  you  a  little  cricket  to  chirp  upon 
the  hearth? 

How  much  we  think  of  you — how  dearly  love  you 
—  how  often  hope  for  you  that  it  may  all  be  happy. 

Sunday  evening  your  father  came  in — he  stayed  a 
Uttle  while.  I  thought  he  looked  solitary.  I  thought 
he  had  grown  old.  How  lonely  he  must  be  —  I  *m 
sorry  for  him. 

Mother  and  Vinnie  send  their  love,  and  hope  you 
are  so  happy.  Austin  has  gone  away.  Father  comes 
home  to-morrow.  I  know  father  will  miss  you.  He 
loved  to  meet  you  here. 

'  So  fades  a  summer  cloud  away, 

So  smiles  the  gale  when  storms  are  o'er, 
So  gently  shuts  the  eye  of  day, 
So  dies  a  wave  along  the  shore.' 

Kiss  me,  dear  Emily,  and  remember  me  if  you  will, 

with  much  respect,  to  your  husband.    Will  you  write 

me  sometime? 

Affectionately, 

Emily. 

To  Mrs  Anthon 

Amherst  [1859]. 
.  .  .  Sweet  at  my  door  this  March  night  another 
candidate.    Go  home  !    We  don't  like  Katies  here  ! 
Stay !     My  heart  votes  for  you,  and  what  am  I, 
indeed,  to  dispute  her  ballot ! 

What  are  your  qualifications  ?  Dare  you  dwell  in 
the  East  where  we  dwell?    Are  you  afraid  of  the 


1859]  TO  MRS  ANTHON  1 47 

sun?  When  you  hear  the  new  violet  sucking  her 
way  among  the  sods,  shall  you  be  resolute  ?  All  we 
are  strangers,  dear,  the  world  is  not  acquainted  with 
us,  because  we  are  not  acquainted  with  her;  and 
pilgrims.  Do  you  hesitate?  And  soldiers,  oft  — 
some  of  us  victors,  but  those  I  do  not  see  to-night, 
owing  to  the  smoke.  We  are  hungry,  and  thirsty, 
sometimes,  we  are  barefoot  and  cold  —  will  you  still 
come  ? 

Theiiy  bright  I  record  you  —  Kate,  gathered  in 
March !  It  is  a  small  bouquet,  dear,  but  what  it 
lacks  in  size  it  gains  in  fadelessness.  Many  can 
boast  a  hollyhock,  but  few  can  bear  a  rose !  And 
should  new  flower  smile  at  limited  associates,  pray 
her  remember  were  there  many,  they  were  not 
worn  upon  the  breast,  but  tilled  in  the  pasture.  So 
I  rise  wearing  her  —  so  I  sleep  holding,  —  sleep  at 
last  with  her  fast  in  my  hand,  and  wake  bearing  my 
flower.  Emilie. 

To  the  Same 

There  are  two  ripenings,  one  of  sight. 

Whose  forces  spheric  wind, 

Until  the  velvet  product 

Drops  spicy  to  the  ground, 

A  homelier  maturing, 

A  process  in  the  burr 

That  teeth  of  frosts  alone  disclose 

On  far  October  air. 

Emilie. 


148  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [i86o 


To  the  Same 

[i860.] 

The  prettiest  of  pleas,  dear,  but  with  a  lynx  like 
me  quite  unavailable.  Finding  is  slow,  facilities  for 
losing  so  frequent,  in  a  world  like  this,  I  hold  with 
extreme  caution.  A  prudence  so  astute  may  seem 
unnecessary,  but  plenty  moves  those  most,  dear,  who 
have  been  in  want,  and  Saviour  tells  us,  Kate,  the 
poor  are  always  with  us.  Were  you  ever  poor?  I 
have  been  a  beggar,  and  rich  to-night,  as  by  God's 
leave  I  believe  I  am,  the  '  lazzaroni's '  faces  haunt, 
pursue  me  still ! 

You  do  not  yet  'dislimn,'  Kate.  Distinctly  sweet 
your  face  stands  in  its  phantom  niche  —  I  touch 
your  hand  —  my  cheek  your  cheek  —  I  stroke  your 
vanished  hair.  Why  did  you  enter,  sister,  since  you 
must  depart?  Had  not  its  heart  been  torn  enough 
but  you  must  send  your  shred? 

Oh,  our  condor  Kate !  Come  from  your  crags 
again !  Oh,  ,dew  upon  the  bloom  fall  yet  again  a 
summer's  night !  Of  such  have  been  the  frauds 
which  have  vanquished  £aces,  sown  plant  of  flesh  the 
church-yard  plats,  and  occasioned  angels. 

There  is  a  subject,,  dear,  on  which  we  never  touch. 
Ignorance  of  its  pageantries  does  not  deter  me.  I 
too  went  out  to  meet  the  dust  early  in  the  morning. 
I  too  in  daisy  mounds  possess  hid  treasure,  therefore 
I  guard  you  more.     You  did  not  tell  me  you  had 


i86i]  TO  MRS  ANTHON  1 49 

once  been  a  'millionaire.*  Did  my  sister  think  that 
opulence  could  be  mistaken?  Some  trinket  will 
remain,  some  babbling  plate  or  jewel. 

I  write  you  from  the  summer.  The  murmuring 
leaves  fill  up  the  chinks  through  which  the  winter  red 

shone  when  Kate  was  here,  and  F was  here,  and 

frogs  sincerer  than  our  own  splash  in  their  Maker's 
pools.  It 's  but  a  little  past,  dear,  and  yet  how  far 
from  here  it  seems,  fled  with  the  snow  !  So  through 
the  snow  go  many  loving  feet  parted  by  'Alps.*  How 
brief,  from  vineyards  and  the  sun  ! 

Parents  and  Vinnie  request  love  to  be  given  girl. 

Emiue. 

[1861  ?] 
To  the  Same 

Katie,  —  Last  year  at  this  time  I  did  not  miss 
you,  but  positions  shifted,  until  I  hold  your  black 
in  strong  hallowed  remembrance,  and  trust  my  colors 
are  to  you  tints  slightly  beloved. 

You  cease,  indeed,  to  talk,  which  is  a  custom 
prevalent  among  things  parted  and  torn,  but  shall  I 
class  this,  dear,  among  elect  exceptions,  and  bear 
you  just  as  usual  unto  the  kind  Lord  ? 

We  dignify  our  faith  when  we  can  cross  the  ocean 
with  it,  though  most  prefer  ships. 

How  do  you  do  this  year  ?  .  .  .  How  many  years, 
I  wonder,  will  sow  the  moss  upon  them,  before  we 
bind  again,  a  little  altered,  it  may  be,  elder  a  little 


1 50  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICICINSON  [1861 

it  will  be,  and  yet  the  same,  as  suns  which  shine  be- 
tween our  lives  and  loss,  and  violets  —  not  last 
year's,  but  having  the  mother's  eyes. 

Do  you  find  plenty  of  food  at  home  ?  Famine  is 
unpleasant. 

It  is  too  late  for  frogs  —  or  what  pleases  me 
better,  dear,  not  quite  early  enough !  The  pools 
were  full  of  you  for  a  brief  period,  but  that  brief 
period  blew  away,  leaving  me  with  many  stems,  and 
but  a  few  foliage  !  Gentlemen  here  have  a  way  of 
plucking  the  tops  of  the  trees,  and  putting  the  fields 
in  their  cellars  annually,  which  in  point  of  taste  is 
execrable,  and  would  they  please  omit,  I  should 
have  fine  vegetation  and  foliage  all  the  year  round, 
and  never  a  winter  month.  Insanity  to  the  sane 
seems  so  unnecessary  —  but  I  am  only  one,  and 
they  are  '  four  and  forty,'  which  little  affair  of  num- 
bers leaves  me  impotent.  Aside  from  this,  dear 
Katie,  inducements  to  visit  Amherst  are  as  they 
were  —  I  am  pleasantly  located  in  the  deep  sea,  but 
love  will  row  you  out,  if  her  hands  are  strong,  and 
don't  wait  till  I  land,  for  I  *m  going  ashore  on  the 

other  side. 

Emilie. 

Following  are  letters  written  to  her  sister, 
Miss  Lavinia  Dickinson,  while  Emily  was  re- 
ceiving treatment  for  her  eyes  in  Boston.  She 
was  there  for  this  purpose  twice,  —  during  the 
summer  of  1864,  and  again  in  1865,  usually 


1S64]  TO  MISS  LAVINIA  DICKINSON  1 51 

writing  of  these  years  as  *  when  I  was  sick  so 
long,*  which  has  given  many  persons  the  idea 
of  an  invalidism  she  never  had. 

[1864.] 

Dear  Vinnie,  —  Many  write  that  they  do  not 
write  because  that  they  have  too  much  to  say,  I  that 
I  have  enough.  Do  you  remember  the  whippoor- 
will  that  sang  one  night  on  the  orchard  fence,  and 
then  drove  to  the  south,  and  we  never  heard  of  him 
afterward? 

He  will  go  home,  and  I  shall  go  home,  perhaps 
in  the  same  train.  It  is  a  very  sober  thing  to  keep 
my  summer  in  strange  towns — what,  I  have  not 
told,  but  I  have  found  friends  in  the  wilderness. 
You  know  Elijah  did,  and  to  see  the  '  ravens '  mend- 
ing my  stockings  would  break  a  heart  long  hard. 

Fanny  and  Lou  are  solid  gold,  and  Mrs  B and 

her  daughter  very  kind,  and  the  doctor  enthusiastic 
about  my  getting  well.  I  feel  no  gayness  yet — I 
suppose  I  had  been  discouraged  so  long. 

You  remember  the  prisoner  of  Chillon  did  not 
know  liberty  when  it  came,  and  asked  to  go  back  to 
jaiL 

C and  A came  to  see  me  and  brought 

beautiful  flowers.  Do  you  know  what  made  them 
remember  me  ?     Give  them  my  love  and  gratitude. 

They   told  me  about  the  day  at  Pelham,    you, 

dressed  in  daisies,  and  Mr  McD .     I  could  n't 

see  you,  Vinnie.     I  am  glad  of  all  the  roses  you  find, 


152  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1865 

while  your  primrose  is  gone.    How  kind  Mr  C 

grew.     Was  Mr  D dear? 

Emily  wants  to  be  well  —  if  any  one  alive  wants 
to  get  well  more,  I  would  let  him,  first. 

Give  my  love  to  father  and  mother  and  Austin. 

Tell  Margaret  I  remember  her,  and  hope  Richard  is 

well.  .  .  .  How  I  wish  I  could  rest  all  those  who  are! 

tired  for  me. 

Emily. 

To  the  Same 

[1865.] 

Dear  Vinnie,  —  The  hood  is  far  under  way,  and 
the  girls  think  it  a  beauty.  ...  I  hope  the  chimneys 
are  done,  and  the  hemlocks  set,  and  the  two  teeth 
filled  in  the  front  yard.  How  astonishing  it  will 
be  to  me  !  .  .  . 

The  pink  lily  you  gave  Lou  has  had  five  flowers 
since  I  came,  and  has  more  buds.  The  girls  think 
it  my  influence.  Lou  wishes  she  knew  father's  view 
of  Jeff  Davis*  capture  —  thinks  no  one  but  him  can 
do  it  justice.  She  wishes  to  send  a  photograph  of 
the  arrest  to  Austin,  including  the  skirt  and  spurs, 
but  fears  he  will  think  her  trifling  with  him.  I 
advised  her  not  to  be  rash. 

How  glad  I  should  be  to  see  you  all,  but  it  won't 
be  long,  Vinnie.  You  will  be  willing,  won't  you,  for 
a  little  while?  It  has  rained  and  been  very  hot, 
and  mosquitoes,  as  in  August.  I  hope  the  flowers  are 
well.    The  tea-rose  I  gave  Aunt  L has  a  flower 


1865]  TO  MISS  LAVINIA  DICKINSON  1 53 

now.     Is  the  lettuce  ripe  ?   Persons  wear  no  bonnets 

here.     Fanny  has  a  blade  of  straw  with  handle  of 

ribbon. 

Affectionately, 

Emily. 

To  the  Same 

.  .  .  Father  told  me  you  were  going.  I  wept  for 
the  little  plants,  but  rejoiced  for  you.  Had  I  loved 
them  as  well  as  I  did,  I  could  have  begged  you  to 
stay  with  them,  but  they  are  foreigners  now,  and  all, 
a  foreigner.  I  have  been  sick  so  long  I  do  not  know 
the  sun.  I  hope  they  may  be  alive,  for  home  would 
be  strange  except  them,  now  the  world  is  dead. 

A N lives  here  since  Saturday,  and  two 

new  people  more,  a  person  and  his  wife,  so  I  do  little 

but  fly,  yet  always  find  a  nest.     I  shall  go  home  in 

two  weeks.   You  will  get  me  at  Palmer? 

Love  for  E and  Mr  D . 

Sister. 

To  the  Same 

.  .  .  The  Doctor  will  let  me  go  Monday  of  Thanks- 
giving week.  He  wants  to  see  me  Sunday,  so  I  can- 
not before.  .  .   .  Love  for  the  Middletown  pearls. 

Shall  write  E after  Tuesday,  when  I  go  to  the 

Doctor.     Thank  her  for  sweet  note. 

The  drums  keep  on  for  the  still  man  —  but  Emily 

must  stop. 

Love  of  Fanny  and  Lou. 

Sister. 


154  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1865 

Soon  after  the  close  of  the  war,  a  friend, 
Mrs  Vanderbilt  of  Long  Island,  met  with  a 
very  serious  bodily  accident.  Upon  her  re- 
covery she  received  the  following  welcome  to 
the  realm  of  health  :  — 

To  this  world  she  returned, 

But  with  a  tingle  of  that ; 

A  compound  manner, 

As  a  sod 

Espoused  a  violet 

That  chiefer  to  the  skies 

Than  to  himself  allied, 

Dwelt,  hesitating. 

Half  of  dust. 

And  half  of  day,  the  bride. 

Emily. 

On  the  occasion  of  another  friend's  departure 
from  Amherst  after  a  visit,  Emily's  good-by  was 
embodied  in  the  following  lines,  accompanied 
by  an  oleander  blossom  tied  with  black  ribbon  : 

We  '11  pass  without  a  parting, 

So  to  spare 

Certificate  of  absence. 

Deeming  where 

I  left  her  I  could  find  her 

If  I  tried. 

This  way  I  keep  from  missing 

Those  who  died. 

Emily. 


CHAPTER  IV 

To  Dr  y.  G.  Holland  and  Mrs  Holland 

TPHE  dates  of  these  letters  can  be  approx- 
-*•  imated  only  by  the  hand-writing  — 
which  varies  from  the  early  style,  about  1853, 
to  the  latest — and  by  events  mentioned,  the 
time  of  whose  occurrence  is  known.  Mrs  Hol- 
land writes  that  there  were  many  other  letters, 
even  more  quaint  and  original,  but  unhappily 
not  preserved. 

[About  1853.] 

Friday  Evening. 

Thank  you,  dear  Mrs  Holland  —  Vinnie  and  I 
will  come,  if  you  would  like  to  have  us.  We  should 
have  written  before,  but  mother  has  not  been  well, 
and  we  hardly  knew  whether  we  could  leave  her, 
but  she  is  better  now,  and  I  write  quite  late  this 
evening,  that  if  you  still  desire  it,  Vinnie  and  I  will 
come.  Then,  dear  Mrs  Holland,  if  agreeable  to 
you,  we  will  take  the  Amherst  train  on  Tuesday 
moming,  for  Springfield,  and  be  with  you  at  noon. 

The  cars  leave  here  at  nine  o'clock,  and  I  think 


IS6        LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1853 

reach  Springfield  at  twelve.  I  can  think  just  how 
we  dined  with  you  a  year  ago  from  now,  and  it 
makes  my  heart  beat  faster  to  think  perhaps  we  *11 
see  you  so  little  while  from  now. 

To  live  a  thousand  years  would  not  make  me 
forget  the  day  and  night  we  spent  there,  and  while 
I  write  the  words,  I  don't  believe  I  *m  coming,  so 
sweet  it  seems  to  me.  I  hope  we  shall  not  tire  you ; 
with  all  your  other  cares,  we  fear  we  should  not 
come,  but  you  will  not  let  us  trouble  you,  will  you, 
dear  Mrs  Holland  ? 

Father  and  mother  ask  a  very  warm  remembrance 
to  yourself  and  Dr  Holland. 

We  were  happy  the  grapes  and  figs  seemed  ac- 
ceptable to  you,  and  wished  there  were  many  more. 
I  am  very  sorry  to  hear  that  'Kate'  has  such 
excellent  lungs.  With  all  your  other  cares,  it  must 
be  quite  a  trial  to  you. 

It  is  also  a  source  of  pleasure  to  me  that  Annie 
goes  to  sleep,  on  account  of  the  'interregnum*  it 
must  afford  to  you. 

Three  days  and  we  are  there  —  happy  —  very 
happy  !  To-morrow  I  will  sew,  but  I  shall  think  of 
you,  and  Sunday  sing  and  pray  —  yet  I  shall  not 
forget  you,  and  Monday's  very  near,  and  here's 
to  me  on  Tuesday !  Good-night,  dear  Mrs  Hol- 
land —  I  see  I  'm  getting  wild  —  you  will  forgive  me 
all,  and  not  forget  me  all,  though  ?  Vinnie  is  fast 
asleep,  or  her  love  would  be  here  —  though  she  is,  it 
is.   Once  more,  if  it  is  fair,  we  will  come  on  Tuesday, 


i853]         TO  DR  AND  MRS  J.  G,  HOLLAND  1 57 

and  you  love  to  have  us,  but  if  not  convenient, 

please  surely  tell  us  so. 

Affectionately, 

Emiue. 

Tuesday  Evening. 

Dear  Dr  and  Mrs  Holland,  —  dear  Minnie  — 
it  is  cold  to-night,  but  the  thought  of  you  so  warm, 
that  I  sit  by  it  as  a  fireside,  and  am  never  cold  any 
more.  I  love  to  write  to  you  —  it  gives  my  heart 
a  holiday  and  sets  the  bells  to  ringing.  If  prayers 
had  any  answers  to  them,  you  were  all  here  to-night, 
but  I  seek  and  I  don't  find,  and  knock  and  it  is 
not  opened.  Wonder  if  God  is  just  —  presume  He 
is,  however,  and  't  was  only  a  blunder  of  Matthew's. 

I  think  mine  is  the  case,  where  when  they  ask  an 
egg,  they  get  a  scorpion,  for  I  keep  wishing  for  you, 
keep  shutting  up  my  eyes  and  looking  toward  the 
sky,  asking  with  all  my  might  for  you,  and  yet  you 
do  not  come.  I  wrote  to  you  last  week,  but  thought 
you  would  laugh  at  me,  and  call  me  sentimental, 
so  I  kept  my  lofty  letter  for  'Adolphus  Hawkins, 
Esq.' 

If  it  was  n't  for  broad  daylight,  and  cooking- stoves, 
and  roosters,  I'm  afraid  you  would  have  occasion 
to  smile  at  my  letters  often,  but  so  sure  as  'this 
mortal'  essays  immortality,  a  crow  from  a  neigh- 
boring farm-yard  dissipates  the  illusion,  and  I  am 
here  again. 

And  what  I  mean  is  this  —  that  I  thought  of  you 


158  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1855 

all  last  week,  until  the  world  grew  rounder  than  it 
sometimes  is,  and  I  broke  several  dishes. 

Monday,  I  solemnly  resolved  I  would  be  sensible^ 
so  I  wore  thick  shoes,  and  thought  of  Dr  Humphrey, 
and  the  Moral  Law.  One  glimpse  of  The  Republican 
makes  me  break  things  again  —  I  read  in  it  every 
night. 

Who  writes  those  funny  accidents,  where  railroads 
meet  each  other  unexpectedly,  and  gentlemen  in 
factories  get  their  heads  cut  off  quite  informally? 
The  author,  too,  relates  them  in  such  a  sprightly 
way,  that  they  are  quite  attractive.  Vinnie  was 
disappointed  to-night,  that  there  were  not  more 
accidents  —  I  read  the  news  aloud,  while  Vinnie 
was  sewing.  The  Republican  seems  to  us  like  a 
letter  from  you,  and  we  break  the  seal  and  read  it 
eagerly.  .  •  . 

Vinnie  and  I  talked  of  you  as  we  sewed,  this 
afternoon.  I  said  —  *  how  far  they  seem  from  us,' 
but  Vinnie  answered  me  'only  a  little  way.*  .  .  . 
I  *d  love  to  be  a  bird  or  bee,  that  whether  hum  or 
sing,  still  might  be  near  you. 

Heaven  is  large  —  is  it  not?     Life  is  short  too, 

isn't  it?    Then  when  one.  is  done,  is  there  not 

another,  and  —  and  —  then  if  God  is  willing,  we 

are  neighbors  then.     Vinnie  and  mother  send  their 

love.     Mine  too  is  here.     My  letter  as  a  bee,  goes 

laden.     Please  love  us  and  remember  us.     Please 

write  us  very  soon,  and  tell  us  how  you  are.  .  .  . 

Affectionately, 

Emiue. 


4U»#^         0f€y^9        ,^4CZ  Ac^^fiJ*  ^^ 


vi. 


r 


^2^ 


f 


X 


^^'fc#»'4^^*-r^&gt;  &lt;/ 


l6o  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1853 


[Late  Autumn,  1853.] 

Sabbath  Afternoon, 

Dear  Friends,  —  I  thought  I  would  write  again. 
I  write  you  many  letters  with  pens  which  are  not 
seen.     Do  you  receive  them? 

I  think  of  you  all  to-day,  and  dreamed  of  you  last 
night. 

When  father  rapped  on  my  door  to  wake  me  this 
morning,  I  was  walking  with  you  in  the  most  won- 
derful garden,  and  helping  you  pick  —  roses,  and 
though  we  gathered  with  all  our  might,  the  basket 
was  never  full.  And  so  all  day  I  pray  that  I  may 
walk  with  you,  and  gather  roses  again,  and  as  night 
draws  on,  it  pleases  me,  and  I  count  impatiently 
the  hours  'tween  me  and  the  darkness,  and  the 
dream  of  you  and  the  roses,  and  the  basket  never 
full. 

God  grant  the  basket  fill  not,  till,  with  hands  purer 
and  whiter,  we  gather  flowers  of  gold  in  baskets 
made  of  pearl;  higher  —  higher!  It  seems  long 
since  we  heard  from  you  —  long,  since  how  little 
Annie  was,  or  any  one  of  you  —  so  long  since  Cattle 
Show,  when  Dr  Holland  was  with  us.  Oh,  it  always 
seems  a  long  while  from  our  seeing  you,  and  even 
when  at  your  house,  the  nights  seemed  much  more 
long  than  they're  wont  to  do,  because  separated 
from  you.  I  want  so  much  to  know  if  the  friends 
are  all  well  in  that  dear  cot  in  Springfield  —  and  if 
well  whether  happy,  and  happy  —  how  happy,  and 


i8s3]         TO  DR  AND  MRS  J,  G,  HOLLAND  l6l 

-why,  and  what  bestows  the  joy?  And  then  those 
other  questions,  asked  again  and  again,  whose 
answers  are  so  sweet,  do  they  love  —  remember  us  — 
wish  sometimes  we  were  there  ?  Ah,  friends  —  dear 
friends  —  perhaps  my  queries  tire  you,  but  I  so  long 
to  know. 

The  minister  to-day,  not  our  own  minister, 
preached  about  death  and  judgment,  and  what 
would  become  of  those,  meaning  Austin  and  me, 
who  behaved  improperly  —  and  somehow  the  ser- 
mon scared  me,  and  father  and  Vinnie  looked  very 
solemn  as  if  the  whole  was  true,  and  I  would  not 
for  worlds  have  them  know  that  it  troubled  me,  but 
I  longed  to  come  to  you,  and  tell  you  all  about  it, 
and  learn  how  to  be  better.  He  preached  such  an 
awfiil  sermon  though,  that  I  did  n't  much  think 
I  should  ever  see  you  again  until  the  Judgment 
Day,  and  then  you  would  not  speak  to  me,  according 
to  his  story.  The  subject  of  perdition  seemed  to 
please  him,  somehow.  It  seems  very  solemn  to  me. 
I  *11  tell  you  all  about  it,  when  I  see  you  again. 

I  wonder  what  you  are  doing  to-day  —  if  you  have 
been  to  meeting?  To-day  has  been  a  fair  day, 
very  still  and  blue.  To-night  the  crimson  children 
are  playing  in  the  west,  and  to-morrow  will  be 
colder.  How  sweet  if  I  could  see  you,  and  talk 
of  all  these  things !  Please  write  us  very  soon. 
The  days  with  you  last  September  seem  a  great  way 
off,  and  to  meet  you  again,  delightful.  I  'm  sure  it 
won't  be  long  before  we  sit  together. 

VOL.  I.— II 


l62  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1854 

Then  will  I  not  repine,  knowing  that  bird  of  mine^ 

though  flown  —  leameth  beyond  the  sea,  melody  new 

for  me,  and  will  return. 

Affectionately, 

Emily. 

This  little  poem  was  enclosed  in  the  fore- 
going letter:  — 

Truth  is  as  old  as  God, 

His  twin  identity  — 

And  will  endure  as  long  as  He, 

A  co-eternity. 

And  perish  on  the  day 

That  He  is  borne  away 

From  mansion  of  the  universe, 

A  lifeless  Deity. 

[Enclosing  some  leaves,  1854.] 

January  2d, 
May  it  come  to-day  ? 

Then  New  Year  the  sweetest,  and  long  life  the 

merriest,  and  the  Heaven  highest  —  by  and  by ! 

Emtt.ie&gt; 

{Spring,  1854.] 

Philadelphia. 
Dear  Mrs  Holland  and  Minnie,  and  Dr  Holland 
too  —  I  have  stolen  away  from  company  to  write  a 
note  to  you ;  and  to  say  that  I  love  you  still. 

I  am  not  at  home  —  I  have  been  away  just  five 


1854]  TO  DR  AND  MRS  J.  G.  HOLLAND  1 63 

weeks  to-day,  and  shall  not  go  quite  yet  back  to 
Massachusetts.  Vinnie  is  with  me  here,  and  we 
have  wandered  together  into  many  new  ways. 

We  were  three  weeks  in  Washington,  while  father 
was  there,  and  have  been  two  in  Philadelphia.  We 
have  had  many  pleasant  times,  and  seen  much  that 
is  fair,  and  heard  much  that  is  wonderful  —  many 
sweet  ladies  and  noble  gentlemen  have  taken  us  by 
the  hand  and  smiled  upon  us  pleasantly  —  and  the 
sun  shines  brighter  for  our  way  thus  far. 

I  will  not  tell  you  what  I  saw  —  the  elegance, 
the  grandeur ;  you  will  not  care  to  know  the  value  of 
the  diamonds  my  Lord  and  Lady  wore,  but  if  you 
have  n't  been  to  the  sweet  Mount  Vernon,  then  I  will 
tell  you  how  on  one  soft  spring  day  we  glided  down 
the  Potomac  in  a  painted  boat,  and  jumped  upon 
the  shore  —  how  hand  in  hand  we  stole  along  up  a 
tangled  pathway  till  we  reached  the  tomb  of  General 
George  Washington,  how  we  paused  beside  it,  and 
no  one  spoke  a  word,  then  hand  in  hand,  walked 
on  again,  not  less  wise  or  sad  for  that  marble  story ; 
how  we  went  within  the  door  —  raised  the  latch 
he  lifted  when  he  last  went  home  —  thank  the  Ones 
in  Light  that  he 's  since  passed  in  through  a  brighter 
wicket  I  Oh,  I  could  spend  a  long  day,  if  it  did  not 
weary  you,  telling  of  Mount  Vernon  —  and  I  will 
sometime  if  we  live  and  meet  again,  and  God  grant 
we  shall  1 

I  wonder  if  you  have  all  forgotten  us,  we  have 
stayed  away  so  long.     I  hope  you  have  n*t  —  I  tried 


l64       LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1854 

to  write  so  hard  before  I  went  from  home,  but  the 

moments  were  so  busy,  and  then  they  flew  so.     I 

was  sure  when  days  did  come  in  which  I  was  less 

busy,  I  should  seek  your  forgiveness,  and  it  did  not 

occur  to  me  that  you  might  not  forgive  me.     Am  I 

too  late  to-day?     Even  if  you   are  angry,  I  shall 

keep  praying  you,  till  from  very  weariness,  you  will 

take  me  in.     It  seems  to  me  many  a  day  since  we 

were  in  Springfield,  and  Minnie  and  the  dumb-bells 

seem  as  vague  —  as  vague ;  and  sometimes  I  wonder 

if  I  ever   dreamed  —  then  if  I  *m   dreaming  now, 

then  if  I  always  dreamed,  and  there  is  not  a  world, 

and  not  these  darling  friends,  for  whom  I  would  not 

count  my  life  too  great  a  sacrifice.     Thank  God 

there  is  a  world,  and  that  the  friends  we  love  dwell 

forever  and  ever  in  a  house  above.     I  fear  I  grow 

incongruous,  but  to  meet  my  friends  does  delight 

me  so  that  I  quite  forget  time  and  sense  and  so 

forth. 

Now,  my  precious  friends,  if  you  won't  forget  me 

until  I  get  home,  and  become  more  sensible,  I  will 

write  again,  and  more  properly.     Why  did  n't  I  ask 

before,  if  you  were  well  and  happy? 

Forgetful 

Emiije. 

[November,  1854.] 

Saturday  Eve, 

I  come  in  flakes,  dear  Dr  Holland,  for  verily  it 
snows,  and  as  descending  swans,  here  a  pinion  and 


1854]        TO  DR  AND  MRS  J,  G,  HOLLAND  165 

there  a  pinion,  and  anon  a  plume,  come  the  bright 
inhabitants  of  the  white  home. 

I  know  they  fall  in  Springfield ;  perhaps  you  see 
them  now  —  and  therefore  I  look  out  again,  to  see  if 
you  are  looking. 

How  pleasant  it  seemed  to  hear  your  voice  —  so 
said  Vinnie  and  I,  as  we  as  individuals,  and  then 
collectively,  read  your  brief  note.  Why  did  n't  you 
speak  to  us  before  ?  We  thought  you  had  forgotten 
us — we  concluded  that  one  of  the  bright  things 
had  gone  forever  more.  That  is  a  sober  feeling, 
and  it  must  n't  come  too  often  in  such  a  world  as 
this.  A  violet  came  up  next  day,  and  blossomed  in 
our  garden,  and  were  it  not  for  these  same  flakes, 
I  would  go  in  the  dark  and  get  it,  so  to  send  to 
you.  Thank  Him  who  is  in  Heaven,  Katie  Holland 
lives  1  Kiss  her  on  every  cheek  for  me  —  I  really 
can't  remember  how  many  the  bairn  has  —  and  give 
my  warmest  recollection  to  Mrs  Holland  and  Min- 
nie, whom  to  love,  this  Saturday  night,  is  no  trifling 
thing.  I  'm  very  happy  that  you  are  happy  —  and  ] 
that  you  cheat  the  angels  of  another  one.  ( 

I  would  the  many  households  clad  in  dark  attire ; 
had  succeeded  so.      You  must   all  be  happy  and 
strong  and  well.     I  love  to  have  the  lamps  shine  on 
your  evening  table.    I  love  to  have  the  sun  shine  on 
your  daily  walks. 

The  '  new  house ' !  God  bless  it !  You  will  leave 
the '  maiden  and  married  life  of  Mary  Powell '  be- 
hind. 

Love  and  remember  Emhje. 


1 66  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1855 

While  the  family  lived  for  many  years  in  the 
old  mansion  built  by  Emily  Dickinson's  grand- 
father, the  Hon.  Samuel  Fowler  Dickinson, 
they  had  moved  away  from  it  about  1840;  and 
the  following  letter  describes  their  return  after 
fifteen  years  to  their  early  home,  where  Emily 
was  born,  and  where  she  died :  — 

[1855] 

Sabbath  Day. 

Your  voice  is  sweet,  dear  Mrs  Holland  —  I  wish 
I  heard  it  oftener. 

One  of  the  mortal  musics  Jupiter  denies,  and 
when  indeed  its  gentle  measures  fall  upon  my  ear, 
I  stop  the  birds  to  listen.  Perhaps  you  think  I 
have  no  bird,  and  this  is  rhetoric —  pray,  Mr 
Whately,  what  is  that  upon  the  cherry-tree? 
Church  is  done,  and  the  winds  blow,  and  Vinnie  is 
in  that  pallid  land  the  simple  call  'sleep.*.  They 
will  be  wiser  by  and  by,  we  shall  all  be  wiser ! 
While  I  sit  in  the  snows,  the  summer  day  on  which 
you  came  and  the  bees  and  the  south  wind,  seem 
fabulous  as  Heaven  seems  to  a  sinful  world  —  and 
I  keep  remembering  it  till  it  assumes  a  spectral  air, 
and  nods  and  winks  at  me,  and  then  all  of  you  turn 
to  phantoms  and  vanish  slow  away.  We  cannot 
talk  and  laugh  more,  in  the  parlor  where  we  met, 
but  we  learned  to  love  for  aye,  there,  so  it  is  just  as 
well. 


1855]         TO  DR  AND  MRS  J.  G,  HOLLAND  1 67 


We  shall  sit  in  a  parlor  *not  made  with  hands ' 
unless  we  are  very  careful ! 

I  cannot  tell  you  how  we  moved.  I  had  rather 
not  remember.  I  believe  my  *  effects  *  were  brought 
in  a  bandbox,  and  the  *  deathless  me,*  on  foot,  not 
many  moments  after.  I  took  at  the  time  a  memo- 
randum of  my  several  senses,  and  also  of  my  hat 
and  coat,  and  my  best  shoes  —  but  it  was  lost  in 
the  melee f  and  I  am  out  with  lanterns,  looking  for 
myself. 

Such  wits  as  I  reserved,  are  so  badly  shattered 
that  repair  is  useless  —  and  still  I  can't  help  laugh- 
ing at  my  own  catastrophe.  I  supposed  we  were 
going  to  make  a  '  transit,*  as  heavenly  bodies  did  — 
but  we  came  budget  by  budget,  as  our  fellows  do, 
till  we  fulfilled  the  pantomime  contained  in  the  word 
*  moved.*  It  is  a  kind  of  gone- to- Kansas  feeling, 
and  if  I  sat  in  a  long  wagon,  with  my  family  tied 
behind,  I  should  suppose  without  doubt  I  was  a  party 
of  emigrants ! 

They  say  that  '  home  is  where  the  heart  is.*  I 
think  it  is  where  the  house  is,  and  the  adjacent 
buildings. 

But,  my  dear  Mrs  Holland,  I  have  another  story, 
and  lay  my  laughter  all  away,  so  that  I  can  sigh. 
Mother  has  been  an  invalid  since  we  came  home, 
and  Vinnie  and  I  '  regulated,*  and  Vinnie  and  I 
'  got  settled,*  and  still  we  keep  our  father*s  house, 
and  mother  lies  upon  the  lounge,  or  sits  in  her  easy- 
chair.     I  don't  know  what  her  sickness  is,  for  I  am 


1 68  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1856 

but  a  simple  child,  and  frightened  at  myself.    I  often 

wish  I  was  a  grass,  or  a  toddling  daisy,  whom  all 

these  problems  of  the  dust  might  not  terrify  —  and 

should  my  own  machinery  get  slightly  out  of  gear, 

please,  kind  ladies  and  gentlemen,  some  one  stop 

the  wheel,  —  for  I  know  that  with  belts  and  bands 

of   gold,   I   shall    whizz    triumphant  on  the   new 

stream  !     Love   for  you  —  love  for  Dr  Holland  — 

thanks  for  his  exquisite  hymn  —  tears  for  your  sister 

in  sable,  and  kisses  for  Minnie  and  the  bairns. 

From  your  mad 

Emilie. 


[Spring,  1856?] 

.  .  .  February  passed  like  a  skate  and  I  know 
March.  Here  is  the  *  light '  the  stranger  said  '  was 
not  on  sea  or  land.*  Myself  could  arrest  it,  but  will 
not  chagrin  him. 

.  .  .  Cousin  Peter  told  me  the  Doctor  would 
address  Commencement  —  trusting  it  insure  you 
both  for  papa's  fite  I  endowed  Peter.  We  do  not 
always  know  the  source  of  the  smile  that  flows  to 
us.  .  .  . 

My  flowers  are  near  and  foreign,  and  I  have  but 
to  cross  the  floor  to  stand  in  the  Spice  Isles. 

The  wind  blows  gay  to-day  and  the  jays  bark  like 
blue  terriers. 

I  tell  you  what  I  see  —  the  landscape  of  the  spirit 
requires  a  lung,  but  no  tongue.     I  hold  you  few  I 


1856]         TO  DR  AND  MRS  J.  G.  HOLLAND  1 69 

love,  till  my  heart  is  red  as  February  and  purple  as 
March. 

Hand  for  the  Doctor.  Emily. 

[Late  Summer,  1856.] 

Sabbath  Night, 

Don't  tell,  dear  Mrs  Holland,  but  wicked  as  I  am, 
I  read  my  Bible  sometimes,  and  in  it  as  I  read  to-day, 
I  found  a  verse  like  this,  where  friends  should  'go 
no  more  out ; '  and  there  were  '  no  tears,*  and  I 
wished  as  I  sat  down  to-night  that  we  were  there  — 
not  here  —  and  that  wonderful  world  had  com- 
menced, which  makes  such  promises,  and  rather  than 
to  write  you,  I  were  by  your  side,  and  the  '  hundred 
and  forty  and  four  thousand'  were  chatting  pleasantly, 
yet  not  disturbing  us.  And  I  'm  half  tempted  to  take 
my  seat  in  that  Paradise  of  which  the  good  man 
writes,  and  begin  forever  and  ever  now,  so  wondrous 
does  it  seem.  My  only  sketch,  profile,  of  Heaven  is 
a  large,  blue  sky,  bluer  and  larger  than  the  biggest  I 
have  seen  in  June,  and  in  it  are  my  friends  —  all  of 
them  —  every  one  of  them  —  those  who  are  with  me 
now,  and  those  who  were  '  parted  *  as  we  walked, 
and  'snatched  up  to  Heaven.' 

If  roses  had  not  faded,  and  frosts  had  never  come, 
and  one  had  not  fallen  here  and  there  whom  I  could 
not  waken,  there  were  no  need  of  other  Heaven  than 
the  one  below —  and  if  God  had  been  here  this  sum- 
mer, and  seen  the  things  that  /  have  seen  —  I  guess 
that  He  would  think  His  Paradise  superfluous.    Don't 


170  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1856 

tell  Him,  for  the  world,  though,  for  after  all  He's 
said  about  it,  I  should  like  to  see  what  He  was 
building  for  us,  with  no  hammer,  and  no  stone,  and 
no  joume)rman  either.  Dear  Mrs  Holland,  I  love, 
to-night  —  love  you  and  Dr  Holland,  and  *time  and 
sense  ^  —  and  fading  things,  and  things  that  do  not 
fade. 

I  *m  so  glad  you  are  not  a  blossom,  for  those  in 
my  garden  fade,  and  then  a  '  reaper  whose  name  is 
Death'  has  come  to  get  a  few  to  help  him  make  a 
bouquet  for  himself,  so  I  *m  glad  you  are  not  a  rose 
—  and  I  *m  glad  you  are  not  a  bee,  for  where  they 
go  when  summer 's  done,  only  the  thyme  knows,  and 
even  were  you  a  robin,  when  the  west  winds  came^ 
you  would  coolly  wink  at  me,  and  away,  some 
morning ! 

As  *  little  Mrs  Holland,'  then,  I  think  I  love  you 
most,  and  trust  that  tiny  lady  will  dwell  below  while 
we  dwell,  and  when  with  many  a  wonder  we  seek 
the  new  Land,  her  wistful  face,  with  ours,  shall  look 
the  last  upon  the  hills,  and  first  upon — well.  Home! 

Pardon  my  sanity,  Mrs  Holland,  in  a  world  insane, 
and  love  me  if  you  will,  for  I  had  rather  de  loved 
than  to  be  called  a  king  in  earth,  or  a  lord  in 
Heaven. 

Thank  you  for  your  sweet  note  —  the  clergy  are 
very  well.  Will  bring  such  fragments  from  them  as 
shall  seem  me  good.  I  kiss  my  paper  here  for  you 
and  Dr  Holland  —  would  it  were  cheeks  instead. 

Dearly,  Emiue. 

P.  S.    The  bobolinks  have  gone. 


1857]         TO  DR  AND  MRS  J.  G.  HOLLAND  I7I 

[1857  ?] 

Dear  Sister,  —  After  you  went,  a  low  wind  war- 
bled through  the  house  like  a  spacious  bird,  making 
it  high  but  lonely.  When  you  had  gone  the  love 
came.  I  supposed  it  would.  The  supper  of  the 
heart  is  when  the  guest  has  gone. 

Shame  is  so  intrinsic  in  a  strong  affection  we  must 
all  experience  Adam's  reticence.  I  suppose  the 
street  that  the  lover  travels  is  thenceforth  divine, 
incapable  of  turnpike  aims. 

That  you  be  with  me  annuls  fear  and  I  await 
Commencement  with  merry  resignation.  Smaller 
than  David  you  clothe  me  with  extreme  Goliath. 

Friday  I  tasted  life.  It  was  a  vast  morsel.  A 
circus  passed  the  house  —  still  I  feel'the  red  in  my 
mind  though  the  drums  are  out. 

The  book  you  mention,  I  have  not  met.  Thank 
you  for  tenderness. 

The  lawn  is  full  of  south  and  the  odors  tangle, 
and  I  hear  to-day  for  the  first  the  river  in  the 
tree. 

You  mentioned  spring's  delaying  —  I  blamed  her 
for  the  opposite.     I  would  eat  evanescence  slowly. 

Vinnie  is  deeply  afflicted  in  the  death  of  her  dap- 
pled cat,  though  I  convince  her  it  is  immortal  which 
assists  her  some.  Mother  resumes  lettuce,  involving 
my  transgression — suggestive  of  yourself,  however, 
which  endears  disgrace. 

'House'  is  being  'cleaned.'  I  prefer  pestilence. 
That  is  more  classic  and  less  fell. 


U 


f 


172  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1859 

Yours  was  my  first  arbutus.     It  was  a  rosy  boast. 

I  will  send  you  the  first  witch  hazel. 

A  woman  died  last  week,  young  and  in  hope  but 
a  little  while  —  at  the  end  of  our  garden.  I  thought 
since  of  the  power  of  Death,  not  upon  affection,  but 
its  mortal  signal.     It  is  to  us  the  Nile. 

You  refer  to  the  unpermitted  delight  to  be  with 
those  we  love.  I  suppose  that  to  be  the  license  not 
granted  of  God. 

Count  not  that  far  that  can  be  had. 
Though  sunset  lie  between  — 
Nor  that  adjacent,  that  beside. 
Is  further  than  the  sun. 

Love  for  your  embodiment  of  it.  p 

[1859.] 

God  bless  you,  dear  Mrs  Holland !  I  read  it  in 
the  paper. 

I  'm  so  glad  it  *s  a  little  boy,  since  now  the  little 
sisters  have  some  one  to  draw  them  on  the  sled  — 
and  if  a  grand  old  lady  you  should  live  to  be, 
there  *s  something  sweet,  they  say,  in  a  son's  arm. 

I  pray  for  the  tenants  of  that  holy  chamber,  the 
wrestler,  and  the  wrestled  for.  I  pray  for  distant 
father's  heart,  swollen,  happy  heart ! 

Saviour  keep  them  all  I  Emily. 

[Autumn,  1859.] 

Dear  Hollands,  —  Belong  to  me  !  We  have 
no  fires  yet,  and  the  evenings  grow  cold.  To-mor- 
row, stoves  are  set.     How  many  barefoot  shiver  I 


1859]  TO  DR  AND  MRS  J,  G.  HOLLAND  1 73 

trust  their  Father  knows  who  saw  not  fit  to  give 
them  shoes. 

Vinnie  is  sick  to-night,  which  gives  the  world  a 
russet  tinge,  usually  so  red.  It  is  only  a  headache, 
but  when  the  head  aches  next  to  you,  it  becomes 
important.  When  she  is  well,  time  leaps.  When 
she  is  ill,  he  lags,  or  stops  entirely. 

Sisters  are  brittle  things.  God  was  penurious  with 
me,  which  makes  me  shrewd  with  Him. 

One  is  a  dainty  sum  !  One  bird,  one  cage,  one 
flight ;  one  song  in  those  far  woods,  as  yet  suspected 
by  faith  only ! 

This  is  September,  and  you  were  coming  in  Sep- 
tember. Come  !  Our  parting  is  too  long.  There 
has  been  frost  enough.  We  must  have  summer  now, 
and  '  whole  legions  *  of  daisies. 

The  gentian  is  a  greedy  flower,  and  overtakes  us 
all.  Indeed,  this  world  is  short,  and  I  wish,  until  I 
tremble,  to  touch  the  ones  I  love  before  the  hills 
are  red  —  are  gray  —  are  white  —  are  *  bom  again  ' ! 
If  we  knew  how  deep  the  crocus  lay,  we  never 
should  let  her  go.  Still,  crocuses  stud  many  mounds 
whose  gardeners  till  in  anguish  some  tiny,  vanished 
bulb. 

We  saw  you  that  Saturday  afternoon,  but  heed- 
lessly forgot  to  ask  where  you  were  going,  so  did 
not  know,  and  could  not  write.  Vinnie  saw  Minnie 
flying  by,  one  afternoon  at  Palmer.  She  supposed 
you  were  all  there  on  your  way  from  the  sea,  and 
untied  her  fancy  !  To  say  that  her  fancy  wheedled 
her  is  superfluous. 


y^ 


174  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [i860 

We  talk  of  you  together,  then  diverge  on  life,  then 
hide  in  you  again,  as  a  safe  fold.  Don't  leave  us 
long,  dear  friends  !  You  know  we  're  children  still, 
and  children  fear  the  dark. 

Are  you  well  at  home ?  Do  you  work  now?  Has 
it  altered  much  since  I  was  there  ?  Are  the  children 
women,  and  the  women  thinking  it  will  soon  be 
afternoon  ?  We  will  help  each  other  bear  our  unique 
burdens. 

Is  Minnie  with  you  now  ?  Take  her  our  love,  if  she 
is.  Do  her  eyes  grieve  her  now  ?  Tell  her  she  may 
have  half  ours. 

Mother's  favorite  sister  is  sick,  and  mother  will 
have  to  bid  her  good-night.  It  brings  mists  to  us 
all ;  —  the  aunt  whom  Vinnie  visits,  with  whom  she 
spent,  I  fear,  her  last  inland  Christmas.  Does  God 
take  care  of  those  at  sea?  My  aunt  is  such  a  timid 
woman ! 

Will  you  write  to  us?     I  bring  you  all  their  loves 

—  many. 

They  tire  me.  Emilie. 

[i860.] 

How  is  your  little  Byron?  Hope  he  gains  his 
foot  without  losing  his  genius.  Have  heard  it  ably 
argued  that  the  poet's  genius  lay  in  his  foot  —  as 
the  bee's  prong  and  his  song  are  concomitant.  Are 
you  stronger  than  these?  To  assault  so  minute  a 
creature  seems  to  me  malign,  unworthy  of  Nature 

—  but  the  frost  is  no  respecter  of  persons. 


i86i]  TO  DR  AND  MRS  J,  G,  HOLLAND  175 

I  should  be  glad  to  be  with  you,  or  to  open  your 
letter.  Blossoms  belong  to  the  bee,  if  needs  be  by 
habeas  corpus.  ^^^^^ 

Probably  about  1861  came  this  brilliant,  yet 
half  pathetic,  arraignment  of  the  friends  who 
had  not  written  when  Emily  expected  to  hear. 
Who  could  resist  such  a  plea? 

Friday, 

Dear  Friends,  —  I  write  to  you.  I  receive  no 
letter. 

I  say  *  they  dignify  my  trust.*  I  do  not  disbelieve. 
I  go  again.  Cardinals  wouldn't  do  it.  Cockneys 
would  n*t  do  it,  but  I  can't  stop  to  strut,  in  a  world 
where  bells  toll.  I  hear  through  visitor  in  town,  that 
*  Mrs  Holland  is  not  strong.'  The  little  peacock  in 
me,  tells  me  not  to  inquire  again.  Then  I  remember 
my  tiny  friend  —  how  brief  she  is  —  how  dear  she 
is,  and  the  peacock  quite  dies  away.  Now,  you  need 
not  speak,  for  perhaps  you  are  weary,  and  *  Herod ' 
requires  all  your  thought,  but  if  you  are  well — let 
Annie  draw  me  a  little  picture  of  an  erect  flower ; 
if  you  are  ///,  she  can  hang  the  flower  a  little  on  one 
side ! 

Then,  I  shall  understand,  and  you  need  not  stop 
to  write  me  a  letter.  Perhaps  you  laugh  at  me ! 
Perhaps  the  whole  United  States  are  laughing  at 
me  too  !  /  can't  stop  for  that !  My  business  is  to 
love.     I  found  a  bird,  this  morning,  down  —  down 


i^ 


176  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1864 

—  on  a  little  bush  at  the  foot  of  the  garden,  and 
wherefore  sing,  I  said,  since  nobody  hears ? 

One  sob  in  the  throat,  one  flutter  of  bosom  —  *My 
business  is  to  sing* — and  away  she  rose!  How 
do  I  know  but  cherubim,  once,  themselves,  as  patient, 
listened,  and  applauded  her  unnoticed  hymn  ? 

Emily. 

[1864?] 

Dear  Sister,  —  Father  called  to  say  that  our  steel- 
yard was  fraudulent,  exceeding  by  an  ounce  the  rates 
of  honest  men.  He  had  been  selling  oats.  I  can- 
not stop  smiling,  though  it  is  hours  since,  that  even 
our  steelyard  will  not  tell  the  truth. 

Besides  wiping  the  dishes  for  Margaret,  I  wash 
them  now,  while  she  becomes  Mrs  Lawler,  vicarious 
papa  to  four  previous  babes.  Must  she  not  be  an 
adequate  bride? 

I  winced  at  her  loss,  because  I  was  in  the  habit 
of  her,  and  even  a  new  rolling-pin  has  an  embarrass- 
ing element,  but  to  all  except  anguish,  the  mind 
soon  adjusts. 

It  is  also  November.  The  noons  are  more  laconic 
and  the  sundowns  sterner,  and  Gibraltar  lights  make 
the  village  foreign.     November  always  seemed  to 

me  the  Norway  of  the  year.     is  still  with  the 

sister  who  put  her  child  in  an  ice  nest  last  Monday 
forenoon.  The  redoubtable  God !  I  notice  where 
Death  has  been  introduced,  he  frequently  calls,  mak- 
ing it  desirable  to  forestall  his  advances. 


1864I  TO  DR  AND  MRS  J,  G.  HOLLAND  177 

It  is  hard  to  be  told  by  the  papers  that  a  friend  is 
failing,  not  even  know  where  the  water  lies.  Inci- 
dentally, only,  that  he  comes  to  land.  Is  there  no 
voice  for  these ?    Where  is  Love  to-day? 

Tell  the  dear  Doctor  we  mention  him  with  a  for- 
eign accent,  party  already  to  transactions  spacious 
and  untold.  Nor  have  we  omitted  to  breathe  shorter 
for  our  little  sister.  Sharper  than  dying  is  the  death 
for  the  dying's  sake. 

News  of  these  would  comfort,  when  convenient  or 

possible. 

Emily. 

Dear  Sister, — It  was  incredibly  sweet  that  Austin 
had  seen  you,  and  had  stood  in  the  dear  house  which 
had  lost  its  friend.  To  see  one  who  had  seen  you 
was  a  strange  assurance.  It  helped  dispel  the  fear 
that  you  departed  too,  for  notwithstanding  the  loved 
notes  and  the  lovely  gift,  there  lurked  a  dread  that 
you  had  gone  or  would  seek  to  go.  'Where  the 
treasure  is,*  there  is  the  prospective. 

Austin  spoke  very  warmly  and  strongly  of  you,  and 
we  all  felt  firmer,  and  drew  a  vocal  portrait  of  Kate 
at  Vinnie's  request,  so  vivid  that  we  saw  her.  .  .  . 

Not  all  die  early,  dying  young, 

Maturity  of  fate 

Is  consummated  equally 

In  ages  or  a  night. 

A  hoary  boy  I  Ve  known  to  drop 

Whole-statured,  by  the  side 

Of  junior  of  fourscore  —  't  was  act. 

Not  period,  that  died. 

VOL.  I.  — 12  Emily. 


178  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1868 

Will  some  one   lay  this   little   flower   on   Mrs 

Holland's  pillow? 

Emilie. 

In  handwriting  similar  to  the  letters  about 
1862-68,  are  several  poems,  enclosed  to  the 
Hollands,  among  them,  — 

Away  from  home  are  some  and  I, 
An  emigrant  to  be 
In  a  metropolis  of  homes 
Is  common  possibility. 
The  habit  of  a  foreign  sky 
We,  difficult,  acquire. 
As  children  who  remain  in  face. 
The  more  their  feet  retire. 
And— 

Though  my  destiny  be  fustian 
Hers  be  damask  fine  — 
Though  she  wear  a  silver  apron, 
I,  a  less  divine. 

Still,  my  little  gypsy  being, 
I  would  far  prefer. 
Still  my  little  sunburnt  bosom, 
To  her  rosier. 

For  when  frosts  their  punctual  fingers 
On  her  forehead  lay. 
You  and  I  and  Doctor  Holland 
Bloom  eternally. 


1876]  TO  DR  AND  MRS  J.  G.  HOLLAND  179 

Roses  of  a  steadfast  summer 
In  a  steadfast  land, 
Where  no  autumn  lifts  her  pencil, 
And  no  reapers  stand. 

In  addition  to  these,  many  other  poems  were 
sent  to  the  Hollands  which  have  already  been 
published ;  all  of  them,  however,  showing  slight 
changes  from  copies  which  she  retained. 

[Autumn,  1876.] 

Saturday  Eve, 

Dear  Hollands,  —  Good-night !  I  can't  stay 
any  longer  in  a  world  of  death.  Austin  is  ill  of 
fever.  I  buried  my  garden  last  week  —  our  man, 
Dick,  lost  a  little  girl  through  the  scarlet  fever.  I 
thought  perhaps  that  you  were  dead,  and  not  know- 
ing the  sexton's  address,  interrogate  the  daisies. 
Ah  !  dainty  —  dainty  Death  1  Ah  !  democratic 
Death !  Grasping  the  proudest  zinnia  from  my 
purple  garden,  —  then  deep  to  his  bosom  calling 
the  serfs  child ! 

Say,  is  he  everywhere?  Where  shall  I  hide  my 
things?  Who  is  alive?  The  woods  are  dead.  Is 
Mrs  H.  alive  ?  Annie  and  Katie  —  are  they  below, 
or  received  to  nowhere? 

I  shall  not  tell  how  short  time  is,  for  I  was  told 
by  lips  which  sealed  as  soon  as  it  was  said,  and  the 
open  revere  the  shut.  You  were  not  here  in  summer. 
Summer  ?    My  memory  flutters  —  had  I  —  was  there 


l8o  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1877 

a  summer?  You  should  have  seen  the  fields  go 
—  gay  little  entomology  !  Swift  little  ornithology ! 
Dancer,  and  floor,  and  cadence  quite  gathered  away, 
and  I,  a  phantom,  to  you  a  phantom,  rehearse 
the  story !  An  orator  of  feather  unto  an  audience 
of  fuzz,  —  and  pantomimic  plaudits.  *  Quite  as  good 
as  a  play,'  indeed  !  Tell  Mrs  Holland  she  is  mine. 
Ask  her  if  vice  versa  ?  Mine  is  but  just  the 
thief  s  request  — '  Remember  me  to-day.'  Such  are 
the  bright  chirographies  of  the  'Lamb's  Book.'  Good- 
night !  My  ships  are  in  !  —  My  window  overlooks 
the  wharf!  One  yacht,  and  a  man-of-war;  two 
brigs  and  a  schooner  !  *  Down  with  the  topmast ! 
Lay  her  a*  hold,  a*  hold  ! '  Emiue. 

A  letter  from  Mrs  Holland  to  Emily  and  her 
sister  jointly,  in  1877,  called  forth  this  unique 
protest. 

Sister, — A  mutual  plum  is  not  a  plum.  I  was 
too  respectful  to  take  the  pulp  and  do  not  like  a 
stone. 

Send  no  union  letters.  The  soul  must  go  by 
Death  alone,  so,  it  must  by  life,  if  it  is  a  soul. 

If  a  committee  —  no  matter. 

I  saw  the  sunrise  on  the  Alps  since  I  saw  you. 
Travel  why  to  Nature,  when  she  dwells  with  us? 
Those  who  lift  their  hats  shall  see  her,  as  devout 
do  God. 

I  trust  you  are  merry  and  sound.    The  chances 


iS78]  TO  DR  AND  MR^  J.  G.  HOLLAND         i8l 

are  all  against  the  dear,  when  we  are  not  with  them, 
though  paws  of  principalities  cannot  affront  if  we 
are  by. 

Dr  Vaill  called  here  Monday  on  his  way  to  your 
house  to  get  the  Doctor  to  preach  for  him.  Shall 
search  The  Republican  for  a  brief  of  the  sermon. 
To-day  is  very  homely  and  awkward  as  the  homely 
are  who  have  not  mental  beauty. 

Then  follows,  — 

'The  sky  is  low,  the  clouds  are  mean,' 
printed  at  page  103  of  the  Poems^  First  Series. 

[Spring,  1878.] 

I  thought  that  'Bimam  Wood*  had  'come  to 
Dunsinane.'  Where  did  you  pick  arbutus?  In 
Broadway,  I  suppose.  They  say  that  God  is  every- 
where, and  yet  we  always  think  of  Him  as  somewhat 
of  a  recluse.  ...  It  is  hard  not  to  hear  again  that 
vital  *  Sam  is  coming  *  —  though  if  grief  is  a  test  of 
a  priceless  life,  he  is  compensated.  He  was  not 
ambitious  for  redemption  —  that  was  why  it  is  his. 
'  To  him  that  hath,  shall  be  given.*  Were  it  not  for 
the  eyes,  we  would  know  of  you  oftener.  Have 
they  no  remorse  for  their  selfishness  ?  *  This  taber- 
nacle *  is  a  blissful  trial,  but  the  bliss  predominates. 

I  suppose  you  will  play  in  the  water  at  Alexandria 
Bay,  as  the  baby  does  at  the  tub  in  the  drive.  .  .  . 
Speak  to  us  when  your  eyes  can  spare  you,  and 


1 82  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1879 

*keep  us,  at  home,  or  by  the  way/  as  the  cler- 
gyman says,  when  he  folds  the  church  till  another 

Sabbath. 

Lovingly, 

Emily. 

[August,  1879.] 

Loved  and  Little  Sister,  — Vinnie  brought  in  a* 
sweet  pea  to-day,  which  had  a  pod  on  the  *oflf' 
side.     Startled  by  the  omen,  I  hasten  to  you. 

An  unexpected  impediment  to  my  reply  to  your 
dear  last,  was  a  call  from  my  Aunt  Elizabeth  — *  the 
only  male  relative  on  the  female  side,*  and  though 
many  days  since,  its  flavor  of  court-martial  still  sets 
my  spirit  tmgling. 

With  what  dismay  I  read  of  those  columns  of 
kindred  in  the  Bible  —  the  Jacobites  and  the  Jebu- 
sites  and  the  Hittites  and  the  Jacqueminots ! 

I  am  sure  you  are  better,  for  no  rheumatism  in 
its  senses  would  stay  after  the  thermometer  struck 
ninety ! 

We  are  revelling  in  a  gorgeous  drought. 

The  grass  is  painted  brown,  and  how  nature  would 
look  in  other  than  the  standard  colors,  we  can  all 

infer.  ...  I  bade call  on  you,  but  Vinnie  said 

you  were  *the  other  side  the  globe,'  yet  Vinnie 
thinks  Vermont  is  in  Asia,  so  I  don't  intend  to  be 
disheartened  by  trifles. 

Vinnie  has  a  new  pussy  that  catches  a  mouse  an 
hour.     We  call  her  the  *  minute  hand.'  .  .  • 


i88i]  TO  MRS  J,  G.  HOLLAND  183 

Dr  Holland's  death,  in  October  of  1881, 
brought  grief  to  many  loving  hearts,  but  to 
the  quiet  Amherst  household  peculiar  pain, 
voiced  in  the  notes  to  follow. 

We  read  the  words  but  know  them  not.     We  are 
too  frightened  with  sorrow.     If  that  dear,  tired  one    1 
must  sleep,  could  we  not  see  him  first  ? 

Heaven  is  but  a  little  way  to  one  who  gave  it, 
here.     '  Inasmuch,*  to  him,  how  tenderly  fulfilled  ! 

Our  hearts  have  flown  to  you  before  —  our  break- 
ing voices  follow.  How  can  we  wait  to  take  you  all 
in  our  sheltering  arms  ? 

Could  there  be  new  tenderness,  it  would  be  for 
you,  but  the  heart  is  full — another  throb  would 
split  it  —  nor  would  we  dare  to  speak  to  those 
whom  such  a  grief  removes,  but  we  have  somewhere 
heard  '  A  little  child  shall  lead  them.' 

Emh-y. 

Thursday. 

After  a  while,  dear,  you  will  remember  that  there 
is  a  heaven  —  but  you  can't  now.  Jesus  will  excuse 
it.     He  will  remember  his  shorn  lamb. 

The  lost  one  was  on  such  childlike  terms  with  the 
Father  in  Heaven.     He  has  passed  from  confiding  ^^ 
to  comprehending —  perhaps  but  a  step.  ^ 

The  safety  of  a  beloved  lost  is  the  first  anguish.  \ 
With  you,  that  is  peace. 

I  shall  never  forget  the  Doctor's  prayer,  my  first 


\ 

I 


1 84  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1881 

mpming  with  you  —  so  simple,  so  believing.  That 
God  must  be  a  friend  —  that  was  a  different  God  — 
and  I  almost  felt  warmer  myself,  in  the  midst  of  a 
tie  so  sunshiny. 

I  am  yearning  to  know  if  he  knew  he  was  fleeing 
—  if  he  spoke  to  you.  Dare  I  ask  if  he  suffered? 
Some  one  will  tell  me  a  very  little,  when  they  have 
the  strength.  .  .  .  Cling  tight  to  the  hearts  that  will 
not  let  you  fall. 

EAflLY. 

Panting  to  help  the  dear  ones  and  yet  not  know- 
ing how,  lest  any  voice  bereave  them  but  that  loved 
voice  that  will  not  come,  if  I  can  rest  them,  here  is 
down  —  or  rescue,  here  is  power. 

One  who  only  said  '  I  am  sorry '  helped  me  the 
most  when  father  ceased  —  it  was  too  soon  for 
language. 

Fearing  to  tell  mother,  some  one  disclosed  it  un- 
known to  us.  Weeping  bitterly,  we  tried  to  console 
her.     She  only  replied  '  I  loved  him  so.' 

Had  he  a  tenderer  eulogy? 

Emily. 

...  I  know  you  will  live  for  our  sake,  dear, 
you  would  not  be  willing  to  for  your  own.  That  is 
the  duty  which  saves.  While  we  are  tr5dng  for 
others,  power  of  life  comes  back,  very  faint  at  first, 
like  the  new  bird,  but  by  and  by  it  has  wings. 

How  sweetly  you  have  comforted  me  —  the  toil 


i88i]  TO  MRS  J.  G.  HOLLAND  185 

to  comfort  you,  I  hoped  never  would  come.  A 
sorrow  on  your  sunny  face  is  too  dark  a  miracle  — 
but  how  sweet  that  he  rose  in  the  morning  —  accom- 
panied by  dawn.  How  lovely  that  he  spoke  with 
you,  that  memorial  time  !  How  gentle  that  he  left 
the  pang  he  had  not  time  to  feel !  Bequest  of 
darkness,  yet  of  light,  since  unbome  by  him. 
*  Where  thou  goest,  we  will  go  '  —  how  mutual,  how 
intimate  !  No  solitude  receives  him,  but  neighbor- 
hood and  friend. 

Relieved  forever  of  the  loss  of  those  that  must 
have  fled,  but  for  his  sweet  haste.  Knowing  he 
could  not  spare  them,  he  hurried  like  a  boy  from 
that  unhappened  sorrow.  Death  has  mislaid  his 
sting  —  the  grave  forgot  his  victory.  Because  the 
flake  fell  not  on  him,  we  will  accept  the  drift,  and 
wade  where  he  is  lain. 

Do  you  remember  the  clover  leaf?  The  little 
hand  that  plucked  it  will  keep  tight  hold  of  mine. 

Please  give  her  love  to  Annie,  and  Kate,  who  also 

gave  a  father. 

Emily. 

[To  Mrs  Holland,  on  the  marriage  of  her  daughter  Annie, 

December  7,  1881  ] 

Sweet  Sister,  —  We  were  much  relieved  to  know 
that  the  dear  event  had  occurred  without  over- 
whelming any  loved  one,  and  perhaps  it  is  sweeter 
and  safer  so.  I  feared  much  for  the  parting,  to 
you,  to  whom  parting  has  come  so  thickly  in  the 


1 86  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1881 

last  few  days.  I  knew  all  would  be  beautiful,  and 
rejoice  it  was.  Few  daughters  have  the  immortality 
of  a  father  for  a  bridal  gift.  Could  there  be  one  more 
costly? 

As  we  never  have  ceased  to  think  of  you,  we  will 
more  tenderly,  now.  Confide  our  Jiappiness  to 
Annie,  in  her  happiness.  We  hope  the  unknown 
balm  may  ease  the  balm  withdrawn. 

You  and  Katie,  the  little  sisters,  lose  her,  jret  ob- 
tain her,  for  each  new  width  of  love  largens  all  the 
rest.  Mother  and  Vinnie  think  and  speak.  Vinnie 
hopes  to  write.  Would  that  mother  could,  but  her 
poor  hand  is  idle.   Shall  I  return  to  you  your  last  and 

sweetest  words  —  *  But  I  love  you  all  *  ? 

Emily. 

[Christmas,  1881.] 

Dare  we  wish  the  brave  sister  a  sweet  Christmas, 
who  remembered  us  punctually  in  sorrow  as  in 
peace  ? 

The  broken  heart  is  broadest.  Had  it  come  all 
the  way  in  your  little  hand,  it  could  not  have  reached 
us  perfecter,  though  had  it,  we  should  have  clutched 
the  hand  and  forgot  the  rest. 

Fearing  the  day  had  associations  of  anguish  to 
you,  I  was  just  writing  when  your  token  came. 
Then,  humbled  with  wonder  at  your  self-forgetting, 
I  delayed  till  now.  Reminded  again  of  gigantic 
Emily  Bronte,  of  whom  her  Charlotte  said  '  Full  of 
ruth  for  others,  on  herself  she  had  no  mercy.*    The 


1883]  "^0  MRS  J.  G.  HOLLAND  187 

hearts  that  never  lean,  must  fall.  To  moan  is 
justified. 

To  thank  you  for  remembering  imder  the  piercing 
circumstances  were  a  profanation. 

God  bless  the  hearts  that  suppose  they  are  beating 
and  are  not,  and  enfold  in  His  infinite  tenderness 
those  that  do  not  know  they  are  beating  and  are. 

Shall  we  wish  a  triumphant  Christmas  to  the 
brother  withdrawn  ?     Certainly  he  possesses  it. 

How  much  of  Source  escapes  with  thee — ^ 
How  chief  thy  sessions  be  — 
For  thou  hast  borne  a  universe 
Entirely  away. 


With  wondering  love, 


Whom  seeing  not,  we  *  clasp. 


Emh^y. 


Emily. 


[1883?] 

Concerning  the  little  sister,  not  to  assault,  not  to 
adjure,  but  to  obtain  those  constancies  which  exalt 
friends,  we  followed  her  to  St  Augustine,  since 
which  the  trail  was  lost,  or  says  George  Steams  of 
his  alligator,  *  there  was  no  such  aspect.' 

The  beautiful  blossoms  waned  at  last,  the  charm 
of  all  who  knew  them,  resisting  the  effort  of  earth  or 
air  to  persuade  them  to  root,  as  the  great  florist 
says  '  The  flower  that  never  will  in  other  climate 
grow.' 


1 88  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1883 

To  thank  you  for  its  fragrance  would  be  impos- 
sible, but  then  its  other  blissful  traits  are  more  than 
can  be  numbered.  And  the  beloved  Christmas,  too, 
for  which  I  never  thanked  you.  I  hope  the  little 
heart  is  well,  —  big  would  have  been  the  width,  — 
and  the  health  solaced ;  any  news  of  her  as  sweet  as 
the  first  arbutus. 

Emily  and  Vinnie  give  the  love  greater  every 
hour. 


CHAPTER  V  \y 
To  Mr  Samuel  Bowles  and  Mrs  Bowles 

AS  Emily  Dickinson  approached  middle 
life,  and  even  before  her  thirtieth  year, 
it  seemed  to  become  more  and  more  impos- 
sible for  her  to  mingle  in  general  society ;  and 
a  growing  feeling  of  shyness,  as  early  as  1862 
or  1863,  caused  her  to  abstain,  sometimes, 
from  seeing  the  dearest  friends  who  came  to 
the  house.  In  spite  of  her  sympathy  with 
sadness,  and  her  deep  apprehension  of  the 
tragic  element  in  life,  she  was  not  only  keenly 
humorous  and  witty,  as  already  said,  but, 
while  made  serious  by  the  insistence  of  life's 
pathos,  she  was  yet  at  heart  as  ecstatic  as 
a  bird.  This  combination  of  qualities  made 
her  companionship,  when  she  vouchsafed  it, 
peculiarly  breezy  and  stimulating.  Such  a 
nature  must  inevitably  know  more  pain  than 
pleasure. 

Passionately  devoted  to  her  friends,  her  hap- 
piness in  their  love  and  trust  was  at  times 
almost  too  intense  to  bear ;  and  it  will  already 


IQO  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1858 

have  been  seen  how  disproportionately  great 
pain  was  caused  by  even  comparatively  slight 
separations-  With  her,  pathos  lay  very  near 
raillery  and  badinage,  —  sadness  very  near 
delight- 

Whether,  in  writing  her  poems,  the  joy  of 
creating  was  sufficient,  or  whether  a  thought 
of  future  and  wider  recognition  ever  came,  it 
is  certain  that  during  life  her  friends  made  her 
audience.  She  cared  more  for  appreciation 
and  approval  from  the  few  who  were  dear 
than  for  any  applause  from  an  impersonal 
public.  She  herself  writes,  *  My  friends  are 
my  estate.* 

All  her  letters  show  this  rare  loyalty  of  soul, 
those  in  the  preceding  chapter  particularly,  but 
none  perhaps  more  strongly  than  those  to  Mr 
and  Mrs  Bowles.  Beginning  about  1858,  the 
letters  cover  a  period  of  twenty-six  or  twenty- 
seven  years.  Often  a  single  short  poem  com- 
prises the  entire  letter,  —  sometimes  only  four 
lines,  and  without  title,  date,  or  signature,  but 
unmistakably  pertinent  to  a  special  occasion 
or  subject- 

[Late  August,  1858  ?] 

Amherst. 

Dear  Mr  Bowles,  —  I  got  the  little  pamphlet. 
I  think  you  sent  it  to  me,  though  unfamiliar  with 
your  hand  —  I  may  mistake. 


1858]  TO  MR    AND  MRS  BOWLES  191 

Thank  you,  if  I  am  right.  Thank  you,  if  not, 
since  here  I  find  bright  pretext  to  ask  you  how  you 
are  to-night,  and  for  the  health  of  four  more, 
elder  and  minor  Mary,  Sallie  and  Sam,  tenderly  to 
inquire. 

I  hope  your  cups  are  fulL 

I  hope  your  vintage  is  untouched.  In  such  a 
porcelain  life  one  likes  to  be  sure  that  all  is  well 
lest  one  stumble  upon  one's  hopes  in  a  pile  of 
broken  crockery. 

My  friends  are  my  estate.  Forgive  me  then  the 
avarice  to  hoard  them !  They  tell  me  those  were 
poor  early  have  different  views  of  gold.  I  don't 
know  how  that  is. 

God  is  not  so  wary  as  we,  else  He  would  give  us 
no  friends,  lest  we  forget  Him !  The  charms  of 
the  heaven  in  the  bush  are  superseded,  I  fear,  by 
the  heaven  in  the  hand,  occasionally. 

Summer  stopped  since  you  were  here.  Nobody 
noticed  her  —  that  is,  no  men  and  women.  Doubt- 
less, the  fields  are  rent  by  petite  anguish,  and 
'mourners  go  about'  the  woods.  But  this  is  not 
for  us.  Business  enough  indeed,  our  stately  resur- 
rection !  A  special  courtesy,  I  judge,  from  what  the 
clergy  say !  To  the  *  natural  man '  bumblebees 
would  seem  an  improvement,  and  a  spicing  of 
birds,  but  far  be  it  from  me  to  impugn  such 
majestic  tastes ! 

Our  pastor  says  we  are  a  '  worm.'  How  is  that 
reconciled  ?  '  Vain,  sinful  worm '  is  possibly  of 
another  species. 


-; 


192  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1858 

Do  you  think  we  shall  'see  God'?  Think  of 
Abraham  strolling  with  Him  in  genial  promenade  ! 

The  men  are  mowing  the  second  hay.  The 
cocks  are  smaller  than  the  first,  and  spicier.  I 
would  distil  a  cup,  and  bear  to  all  my  friends, 
drinking  to  her  no  more  astir,  by  beck,  or  bum, 
or  moor ! 

Good-night,  Mr  Bowles.  This  is  what  they  say 
who  come  back  in  the  morning ;  also  the  closing 
paragraph  on  repealed  lips.  Confidence  in  day- 
break modifies  dusk. 

Blessings   for   Mrs   Bowles,   and   kisses   for    the 

bairns'  lips.     We  want  to  see  you,  Mr  Bowles,  but 

spare  you  the  rehearsal  of  *  familiar  truths.* 

Good-night, 

Emily. 

[Winter,  1858  ?] 

Monday  Eve. 

Dear  Mrs  Bowles,  —  You  send  sweet  messages. 
Remembrance  is  more  sweet  than  robins  in  May 
orchards. 

I  love  to  trust  that  round  bright  fires,  some,  braver 
than  I,  take  my  pilgrim  name.  How  are  papa, 
mamma,  and  the  little  people?  .  .  . 

It  storms  in  Amherst  five  days — it  snows,  and 
then  it  rains,  and  then  soft  fogs  like  veils  hang  on 
all  the  houses,  and  then  the  days  turn  topaz,  like  a 
lady's  pin. 

Thank  you  for  bright  bouquet,  and  afterwards 
verbena.     I  made  a  plant  of  a  little  bough  of  yellow 


1859]  TO  MR  AND  MRS  BOWLES  1 93 

heliotrope  which  the  bouquet  bore  me,  and  call  it 
Mary  Bowles.  It  is  many  days  since  the  summer 
day  when  you  came  with  Mr  Bowles,  and  before 
another  summer  day  it  will  be  many  days.  My 
garden  is  a  little  knoll  with  faces  under  it,  and  only 
the  pines  sing  tunes,  now  the  birds  are  absent.  I 
cannot  walk  to  the  distant  friends  on  nights  piercing 
as  these,  so  I  put  both  hands  on  the  window-pane, 
and  try  to  think  how  birds  fly,  and  imitate,  and  fail, 
like  Mr  *Rasselas.'  I  could  make  a  balloon  of 
a  dandelion,  but  the  fields  are  gone,  and  only  '  Pro- 
fessor Lowe  '  remains  to  weep  with  me.  If  I  built 
my  house  I  should  like  to  call  you.  I  talk  of  all 
these  things  with  Carlo,  and  his  eyes  grow  meaning, 
and  his  shaggy  feet  keep  a  slower  pace.  Are  you 
safe  to-night?  I  hope  you  may  be  glad.  I  ask 
God  on  my  knee  to  send  you  much  prosperity,  few 
winter  days,  and  long  suns.  I  have  a  childish  hope 
to  gather  all  I  love  together  and  sit  down  beside 
and  smile.  .  .  . 

Will  you  come  to  Amherst?  The  streets  are  very 
Gold  now,  but  we  will  make  you  warm.  But  if  you 
never  came,  perhaps  you  could  write  a  letter,  saying 
how  much  you  would  like  to,  if  it  were  *  God's  will.' 
I  give  good-night,  and  daily  love  to  you  and  Mr 
Bowles.  Emiue. 

11859.] 

Amherst. 

I  should  like  to  thank  dear  Mrs  Bowles  for  the 
little  book,  except   my  cheek  is  red  with   shame 
VOL.  I. — 13 


194  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1859 

because  I  write  so  often.     Even  the  *  lilies  of  the 
field '  have  their  dignities. 

Why  did  you  bind  it  in  green  and  gold?  The 
immortal  colors.  I  take  it  for  an  emblem.  I  never 
read  before  what  Mr  Parker  wrote. 

I  heard  that  he  was  *  poison.*  Then  I  like  poison 
very  well.  Austin  stayed  from  service  yesterday 
afternoon,  and  I  .  .  .  found  him  reading  my  Christ- 
mas gift.  ...  I  wish  the  *  faith  of  the  fathers  *  did  n't 
wear  brogans,  and  carry  blue  umbrellas.  I  give  you 
all  *  New  Year  ! '  I  think  you  kept  gay  Christmas^ 
from  the  friend's  account,  and  can  only  sigh  with 
one  not  present  at '  John  Gilpin,'  '  and  when  he  next 
doth  ride  a  race,'  etc.  You  picked  your  berries 
from  my  holly.     Grasping  Mrs  Bowles  ! 

To-day   is  very  cold,  yet  have  I  much  bouquet 
/        upon  the  window-pane   of  moss  and  fern.     I  call 
them  saints'  flowers,  because  they  do  not  romp  as 
other  flowers  do,  but  stand  so  still  and  white. 

The  snow  is  very  tall,  .  .  .  which  makes  the 
trees  so  low  that  they  tumble  my  hair,  when  I  cross 
the  bridge. 

I  think  there  will  be  no  spring  this  year,  the 
flowers  are  gone  so  far.  Let  us  have  spring  in  our 
heart,  and  never  mind  the  orchises !  .  .  .  Please 
have  my  love,  mother's,  and  Vinnie's.  Carlo  sends 
a  brown  kiss,  and  pussy  a  gray  and  white  one,  to 
each  of  the  children. 

Please,  now  I  write  so  often,  make  lamplighter  of 
me,  then  I  shall  not  have  lived  in  vain. 


i86i]  TO  MR  AND  MRS  BOWLES  195 

Dear  Mrs  Bowles,  dear  Mr  Bowles,  dear  Sally  — 

Sam  and  Mamie,  now  all  shut  your  eyes,  while  I  do 

benediction ! 

Lovingly,  Emily. 

[Written  in  1861,  on  the  birth  of  a  son.] 

Dear  Mary,  —  Can  you  leave  your  flower  long 
enough  just  to  look  at  mine? 

Which  is  the  prettiest?  I  shall  tell  you  myself, 
some  day.  I  used  to  come  to  comfort  you,  but  now 
to  tell  you  how  glad  I  am,  and  how  glad  we  all  are. 
.  .  .  You  must  not  stay  in  New  York  any  more  — 
you  must  come  back  now,  and  bring  the  blanket  to 
Massachusetts  where  we  can  all  look.  What  a 
responsible  shepherd !  Four  lambs  in  one  flock  ! 
Shall  you  be  glad  to  see  us,  or  shall  we  seem  old- 
fashioned,  by  the  face  in  the  crib? 

Tell  him  I  've  got  a  pussy  for  him,  with  a  spotted 
gown;  and  a  dog  with  ringlets. 

We  have  very  cold  days  since  you  went  away,  and 

I  think  you  hear  the  wind  blow  far  as  the  Brevoort 

House,  it  comes  from  so  far,  and  crawls  so.     Don't 

let  it  blow  baby  away.     Will  you  call  him  Robert 

for  me  ?     He  is  the  bravest  man  alive,  but  his  boy 

has  no  mamma.    That  makes  us  all  weep,  don't  it? 

Good-night,  Mary. 

Emily. 

One  of  the  very  few  of  Emily  Dickinson's 
verses  named  by  herself  was  sent  Mrs  Bowles 
soon  after  the  preceding  letter. 


196  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1861 


BABY. 

Teach  him,  when  he  makes  the  names, 

Such  an  one  to  say 

On  his  babbling,  berry  lips 

As  should  sound  to  me  — 

Were  my  ear  as  near  his  nest 

As  my  thought,  to-day  — 

As  should  sound  —  *  forbid  us  not '  — 

Some  like  '  Emily.* 

[August,  1861.] 

Mary,  —  I  do  not  know  of  you,  a  long  while. 
I  remember  you  —  several  times.  I  wish  I  knew  if 
you  kept  me?  The  doubt,  like  the  mosquito, 
buzzes  round  my  faith.  We  are  all  human,  Mary, 
until  we  are  divine,  and  to  some  of  us,  that  is  far 
off,  and  to  some  as  near  as  the  lady  ringing  at  the 
door ;  perhaps  that  V  what  alarms.  I  say  I  will  go 
myself  —  I  cross  the  river,  and  climb  the  fence  — 
now  I  am  at  the  gate,  Mary  —  now  I  am  in  the  hall 
—  now  I  am  looking  your  heart  in  the  eye  1 

Did  it  wait  for  me  —  did  it  go  with  the  company? 
Cruel  company,  who  have  the  stocks,  and  farms, 
and  creeds  —  and  /'/  has  just  its  heart !  I  hope  you 
are  glad,  Mary ;  no  pebble  in  the  brook  to-day  —  no 
film  on  noon. 

I  can  think  how  you  look ;  you  can't  think  how  I 
look ;  I  Ve  got  more  freckles,  since  you  saw  me, 


i86i]  TO  MR  AND  MRS  BOWLES  197 

playing  with   the    school-boys;    then   I   pare  the 
'  Juneatmg '  to  make  the  pie,  and  get  my  fingers 

*  tanned.* 

Summer  went  very  fast  —  she  got  as  far  as  the 
woman  from  the  hill,  who  brings  the  blueberry,  and 
that  is  a  long  way.  I  shall  have  no  winter  this 
year,  on  account  of  the  soldiers.  Since  I  cannot 
weave  blankets  or  boots,  I  thought  it  best  to 
omit  the  season.  Shall  present  a  '  memorial '  to 
God  when  the  maples  turn.     Can  I  rely  on  your 

*  name '  ? 

How  is  your  garden,  Mary?  Are  the  pinks  true, 
and  the  sweet  williams  faithful  ?  I  Ve  got  a  ge- 
ranium like  a  sultana,  and  when  the  humming- 
birds come  down,  geranium  and  I  shut  our  eyes, 
and  go  far  away. 

Ask  *  Mamie  '  if  I  shall  catch  her  a  butterfly  with 
a  vest  like  a  Turk?  I  will,  if  she  will  build  him  a 
house  in  her  'morning-glory.' 

Vinnie  would  send  her  love,  but  she  put  on  a 
white  frock,  and  went  to  meet  to-morrow  —  a  few 
minutes  ago ;  mother  would  send  her  love,  but  she 
is  in  the  '  eave  spout,'  sweeping  up  a  leaf  that  blew 
in  last  November;  I  brought  my  own,  myself,  to 
you  and  Mr  Bowles. 

Please  remember  me,  because  I  remember  you  — 
always. 

Then  follows  the  poem  beginning  *  My  river 
runs  to  thee/  published  in  the  First  Series  of 
the  Poems^  page  54. 


198  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1861 

Don*t  cry,  dear  Mary.  Let  us  do  that  for 
you,  because  you  are  too  tired  now.  We  don't 
know  how  dark  it  is,  but  if  you  are  at  sea,  perhaps 
when  we  say  that  we  are  there,  you  won't  be  as 
afraid. 

The  waves  are  very  big,  but  every  one  that  covers 
you,  covers  us,  too. 

Dear  Mary,  you  can't  see  us,  but  we  are  close  at 

your  side.     May  we  comfort  you? 

Lovingly, 

Emily. 

[Autumn,  1861.] 

Friend,  Sir,  —  I  did  not  see  you.  I  am  very 
sorry.  Shall  I  keep  the  wine  till  you  come  again, 
or  send  it  in  by  Dick  ?  It  is  now  behind  the  door 
in  the  library,  also  an  unclaimed  flower.  I  did  not 
know  you  were  going  so  soon.     Oh  1  my  tardy  feet. 

Will  you  not  come  again? 

Friends  are  gems,  infrequent.  Potosi  is  a  care, 
sir.  I  guard  it  reverently,  for  I  could  not  afford  to 
be  poor  now,  after  affluence.  I  hope  the  hearts  in 
Springfield  are  not  so  heavy  as  they  were.  God 
bless  the  hearts  in  Springfield. 

I  am  happy  you  have  a  horse.  I  hope  you  will 
get  stalwart,  and  come  and  see  us  many  years. 

1  have  but  two  acquaintance,  the  *  quick  and  the 
dead'  —  and  would  like  more. 

I  write  you  frequently,  and  am  much  ashamed. 
My  voice  is  not  quite  loud  enough  to  cross  so  many 


1862]  TO  MR  AND  MRS  BOWLES  199 

fields,  which  will,  if  you  please,  apologize  for  my 

pencil. 

Will  you  take  my  love  to  Mrs  Bowles,  whom  I 

remember  every  day? 

Emilie. 

Vinnie  hallos  from  the  world  of  night-caps,  *  don't 
forget  her  love.' 

[January,  1862.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  Are  you  willing?  I  am  so  far 
from  land.  To  offer  you  the  cup,  it  might  some 
Sabbath  come  my  turn.     Of  wine  how  solemn-full ! 

Did  you  get  the  doubloons  —  did  you  vote  upon 
'  Robert  *  ?  You  said  you  would  come  in  February, 
Only  three  weeks  more  to  wait  at  the  gate  ! 

While  you  are  sick,  we  —  are  homesick.  Do  you 
look  out  to-night?  The  moon  rides  like  a  girl 
through  a  topaz  town.  I  don't  think  we  shall  ever 
be  merry  again  —  you  are  ill  so  long.  When  did 
the  dark  happen? 

I  skipped  a  page  to-night,  because  I  come  so 
often,  now,  I  might  have  tired  you. 

That  page  is  fullest,  though. 

Vinnie  sends  her  love.    I  think  father  and  mother 

care  a  great  deal  for  you,  and  hope  you  may  be 

well.     When  you  tire  with  pain,  to  know  that  eyes 

would    cloud,   in   Amherst  —  might    that   comfort, 

some  ? 

Emily. 

We  never  forget  Mary. 


200  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1863 

Dear  Mr  Bowles,  —  Thank  you. 

Faith  is  a  fine  inyention 
When  gentlemen  can  see  t 
But  microscopes  are  prudent 
In  an  emergency  I  ^ 

You  spoke  of  the  *  East.'  I  have  thought  about  it 
this  winter. 

Don't  you  think  you  and  I  should  be  shrewder  to 
take  the  mountain  road? 

That  bareheaded  life,  under  the  grass,  worries 
one  like  a  wasp. 

The  rose  is  for  Mary. 

£mily. 

The  zeros  taught  us  phosphorus  — 
We  learned  to  like  the  fire 
By  plapng  glaciers  when  a  boy, 
And  tinder  guessed  by  power 

Of  opposite  to  balance  odd, 
If  white,  a  red  must  be  !  ^ 
Paralysis,  our  primer  dumb 
Unto  vitality. 

I  could  n't  let  Austin's  note  go,  without  a  word. 

Emily. 

1  Second  Series,  page  53. 

^  The  poems  enclosed  in  letters  to  friends  are  often 
slightly  different  from  her  own  copies  preserved  in  the 
manuscript  volumes.  This  line,  for  instance,  in  another 
place  reads  'Eclipses  suns  imply.' 


i862]  TO  MR  AND  MRS  BOWLES  201 

Sunday  Night. 

Dear  Mary, — Could  you  leave  'Charlie*  long 
enough?  Have  you  time  for  mel  I  sent  Mr 
Bowles  a  little  note,  last  Saturday  morning,  asking 
him  to  do  an  errand  for  me. 

I  forgot  he  was  going  to  Washington,  or  I 
should  n*t  have  troubled  him,  so  late.  Now,  Mary, 
I  fear  he  did  not  get  it,  and  you  tried  to  do  the 
errand  for  me  —  and  it  troubled  you.  Did  it? 
Will  you  tell  me  ?  Just  say  with  your  pencil '  It 
did  n't  tire  me,  Emily,*  and  then  I  shall  be  sure,  for 
with  all  your  care,  I  would  not  have  taxed  you  for 
the  world. 

You  never  refused  me,  Mary,  you  cherished  me 
many  times,  but  I  thought  it  must  seem  so  selfish  to 
ask  the  favor  of  Mr  Bowles  just  as  he  went  from 
home,  only  I  forgot  that.  Tell  me  to-night  just  a 
word,  Mary,  with  your  own  hand,  so  I  shall  know  I 
harassed  none  —  and  I  will  be  so  glad. 

Austin  told  us  of  CharHe  —  I  send  a  rose  for  his 
small  hands. 

Put  it  in,  when  he  goes  to  sleep,  and  then  he  will 
dream  of  Emily,  and  when  you  bring  him  to  Amherst 
we  shall  be  '  old  friends.*  Don't  love  him  so  well, 
you  know,  as  to  forget  us.  We  shall  wish  he  was  n't 
there,  if  you  do,  I  *m  afraid,  sha'n't  we  ? 

I  '11  remember  you,  if  you  like  me  to,  while  Mr 
Bowles  is  gone,  and  that  will  stop  the  lonely,  some, 
but  I  cannot  agree  to  stop  when  he  gets  home  from 
Washington. 


202  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [iSfo 

Good- night,  Mary.  You  won't  forget  my  little 
note,  to-morrow,  in  the  mail.  It  will  be  the  first 
one  you  ever  wrote  me  in  your  life,  and  yet,  was  I 
the  little  friend  a  long  time?     Was  I,  Mary? 

Emily. 

[March,  1862.] 

Perhaps  you  thought  I  did  n*t  care  —  because  I 
stayed  out,  yesterday.  I  did  care,  Mr  Bowles.  I 
pray  for  your  sweet  health  to  Allah  every  morning, 
but  something  troubled  me,  and  I  knew  you  needed 
light  and  air,  so  I  did  n't  come.  Nor  have  I  the 
conceit  that  you  noticed  me  —  but  I  could  n't  bear 
that  you,  or  Mary,  so  gentle  to  me,  should  think  me 
forgetful. 

It  *s  little  at  the  most,  we  can  do  for  ours,  and  we 
must  do  that  flying,  or  our  things  are  flown  I 

Dear  friend,  I  wish  you  were  well. 

It  grieves  me  till  I  cannot  speak,  that  you  are 

suffering.     Won't  you  come  back?     Can't  I    bring 

you  something?     My  little  balm  might  be  o'erlooked 

by  wiser   eyes,  you  know.      Have   you   tried   the 

breeze   that   swings  the   sign,  or  the   hoof  of  the 

dandelion  ?    /  own  'em  —  wait  for  mine  !     This  is 

all  I  have  to  say.     Kinsmen  need  say  nothing,  but 

'  Swiveller '  may  be  sure  of  the 

'  Marchioness.' 
Love  for  Mary. 

Dear  Friend,  — .  .  .  Austin  is  disappointed  — 
he  expected  to  see  you  to-day.     He  is  sure  you 


i862]  TO  MR  AND  MRS  BOWLES  203 

won't  go  to  sea  without  first  speaking  to  him.  I 
presume  if  Emily  and  Vinnie  knew  of  his  writing, 
they  would  entreat  him  to  ask  you  not. 

Austin  is  chilled  by  Frazer's  murder.^  He  says 
his  brain  keeps  saying  over  •  Frazer  is  killed  *  — 
'  Frazer  is  killed/  just  as  father  told  it  to  him.  Two 
or  three  words  of  lead,  that  dropped  so  deep  they 
keep  weighing.     Tell  Austin  how  to  get  over  them  ! 

He  is  very  sorry  you  are  not  better.  He  cares 
for  you  when  at  the  office,  and  afterwards,  too,  at 
home ;  and  sometimes  wakes  at  night,  with  a  worry 
for  you  he  did  n't  finish  quite  by  day.  He  would 
not  like  it  that  I  betrayed  him,  so  you'll  never 
tell.  .  .  . 

Mary  sent  beautiful  flowers.     Did  she  tell  you? 

[Spring,  1862.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  The  hearts  in  Amherst  ache  to- 
night—  you  could  not  know  how  hard.  They 
thought  they  could  not  wait,  last  night,  until  the 
engine  sang  a  pleasant  tune  that  time,  because  that 
you  were  coming.  The  flowers  waited,  in  the  vase, 
and  love  got  peevish,  watching.  A  railroad  person 
rang,  to  bring  an  evening  paper — Vinnie  tipped 
pussy  over,  in  haste  to  let  you  in,  and  I,  for  joy  and 
dignity,  held  tight  in  my  chair.  My  hope  put  out  a 
petal. 

You  would  come,  to-day,  —  but  ...  we  don't  be- 

^  A  son  of  President  Steams  of  Amherst  College,  who 
was  killed  during  the  war,  13th  March,  1862. 


i^ 


204  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1862 

lieve  it,  now ;  *  Mr  Bowles  not  coming  ! '  Would  n't 
you,  to-morrow,  and  this  but  be  a  bad  dream,  gone 
by  next  morning? 

Please  do  not  take  our  spring  away,  since  you  blot 
summer  out !  We  cannot  count  our  tears  for  this, 
because  they  drop  so  fast.  .  .  . 

Dear  friend,  we  meant  to  make  you  brave,  but 
moaned  before  we  thought.*.  .  .  If  you'll  be  sure 
and  get  well,  we  '11  try  to  bear  it.  If  we  could  only 
care  the  less,  it  would  be  so  much  easier.  Your 
letter  troubled  my  throat.  It  gave  that  little  scald- 
ing we  could  not  know  the  reason  for  till  we  grew 
far  up. 

I  must  do  my  good-night  in  crayon  I  meant  to  in 

red. 

Love  for  Mary. 

Emily. 

After  Mr  Bowles  had  sailed  for  Europe, 
Emily  sent  this  quaintly  consoling  note  to 
Springfield. 

[Early  Summer,  1862.] 

Dear  Mary,  —  When  the  best  is  gone,  I  know 
that  other  things  are  not  of  consequence.  The 
heart  wants  what  it  wants,  or  else  it  does  not 
care. 

You  wonder  why  I  write  so.  Because  I  cannot 
help.  I  like  to  have  you  know  some  care  —  so 
when  your  life  gets  faint  for  its  other  life,  you  can 
lean  on  us.  We  won't  break,  Mary.  We  look  very 
small,  but  the  reed  can  carry  weight. 


i862]  TO  MR  AND  MRS  BOWLES  205 

Not  to  see  what  we  love  is  very  terrible,  and  talk- 
ing does  n't  ease  it,  and  nothing  does  but  just  itself. 
The  eyes  and  hair  we  chose  are  all  there  are  —  to 
us.     Is  n't  it  so,  Mary? 

I  often  wonder  how  the  love  of  Christ  is  done 
when  that  below  holds  so. 

I  hope  the  little  '  Robert '  coos  away  the  pain. 
Perhaps  your  flowers  help,  some.  .  .  . 

The  frogs  sing  sweet  to-day  —  they  have  such 
pretty,  lazy  times  —  how  nice  to  be  a  frog  !  .  .  . 

Mother  sends  her  love  to  you  —  she  has  a  sprained 
foot,  and  can  go  but  little  in  the  house,  and  not 
abroad  at  all. 

Don't  dishearten,  Mary,  we  '11  keep  thinking  of  you. 

Kisses  for  all. 

Emily. 

[To  Mr  Bowles,  June,  1862] 

Dear  Friend,  —  You  go  away  —  and  where  you 
go  we  cannot  come  —  but  then  the  months  have 
names  —  and  each  one  comes  but  once  a  year' —  and 
though  it  seems  they  never  could,  they  sometimes 
do,  go  by. 

We  hope  you  are  more  well  than  when  you  lived 
in  America,  and  that  those  foreign  people  are  kind, 
and  true,  to  you.  We  hope  you  recollect  each  life 
you  left  behind,  even  ours,  the  least. 

We  wish  we  knew  how  Amherst  looked,  in  your 
memory.  Smaller  than  it  did,  maybe,  and  yet  things 
swell,  by  leaving,  if  big  in  themselves. 


206  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1863 

We  hope  you  will  not  alter,  but  be  the  same  we 
grieved  for  when  the  China  sailed. 

If  you  should  like  to  hear  the  news,  we  did  not 
die  here  —  we  did  not  change.  We  have  the  guests 
we  did,  except  yourself —  and  the  roses  hang  on  the 
same  stems  as  before  you  went.  Vinnie  trains  the 
honeysuckle,  and  the  robins  steal  the  string  for 
nests  —  quite,  quite  as  they  used  to. 

I  have  the  errand  from  my  heart  —  I  might  forget 
to  tell  it.  Would  you  please  to  come  home?  The 
long  life's  years  are  scant,  and  fly  away,  the  Bible 
says,  like  a  told  story  —  and  sparing  is  a  solemn 
thing,  somehow,  it  seems  to  me  —  and  I  grope  fast, 
with  my  fingers,  for  all  out  of  my  sight  I  own,  to  get 
it  nearer. 

I  had  one  letter  from  Mary.  I  think  she  tries  to 
be  patient  —  but  you  would  n*t  want  her  to  succeed, 
would  you,  Mr  Bowles? 

It 's  fragrant  news,  to  know  they  pine,  when  we  are 
out  of  sight. 

It  is  'most  Commencement.  The  little  cousin 
from  Boston  has  come,  and  the  hearts  in  Pelham 
have  an  added  thrill.  We  shall  miss  you,  most, 
dear  friend,  who  annually  smiled  with  us,  at  the 
gravities.  I  question  if  even  Dr  Vaill  have  his 
wonted  applause. 

Should  anybody,  where  you  go,  talk  of  Mrs 
Browning,  you  must  hear  for  us,  and  if  you  touch 
her  grave,  put  one  hand  on  the  head,  for  me  —  her 
unmentioned  mourner. 


i862]  TO  MR  AND  MRS  BOWLES  207 

Father  and  mother,  and  Vmnie  and  Carlo,  send 
their  love  to  you,  and  warm  wish  for  your  health  — 
and  I  am  taking  lessons  in  prayer,  so  to  coax  God 
to  keep  you  safe.  Good-night,  dear  friend.  You 
sleep  so  far,  how  can  I  know  you  hear? 

Emily. 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  cannot  see  you.  You  will  not 
less  believe  me.  That  you  return  to  us  alive  is 
better  than  a  summer,  and  more  to  hear  your  voice 
below  than  news  of  any  bird. 

Emily. 

[August,  1862.] 

Dear  Mr  Bowles,  —  Vinnie  is  trading  with  a  tin 
peddler  —  buying  water-pots  for  me  to  sprinkle 
geraniums  with  when  you  get  home  next  winter, 
and  she  has  gone  to  the  war. 

Summer  is  n't  so  long  as  it  was,  when  we  stood 
looking  at  it  before  you  went  away;  and  when  I 
finish  August,  we  '11  hop  the  autumn  very  soon,  and 
then  't  will  be  yourself. 

I  don't  know  how  many  will  be  glad  to  see  you,  — 
because  I  never  saw  your  whole  friends,  but  I  have 
heard  that  in  large  cities  noted  persons  chose  you  — 
though  how  glad  those  I  know  will  be,  is  easier  told. 

I  tell  you,  Mr  Bowles,  it  is  a  suffering  to  have  a  sea 
—  no  care  how  blue  —  between  your  soul  and  you. 

The  hills  you  used  to  love  when  you  were  in 
Northampton,   miss   their    old    lover,    could    they 


r" 


/ 


208        LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSOl^  [i86a 

speak;   and  the  puzzled  look  deepens  in   Carlo's 
forehead  as  the  days  go  by  and  you  never  come. 

I  Ve  learned  to  read  the  steamer  place  in  news- 
papers now.  It  *s  *most  like  shaking  hands  with  you, 
or  more  like  your  ringing  at  the  door. 

We  reckon  your  coming  by  the  fruit  When  the 
grape  gets  by,  and  the  pippin  and  the  chestnut  — 
when  the  days  are  a  little  short  by  the  clock,  and  a 
little  long  by  the  want  —  when  the  sky  has  new  red 
gowns,  and  a  purple  bonnet  —  then  we  say  you  will 
come.     I  am  glad  that  kind  of  time  goes  by. 

It  is  easier  to  look  behind  at  a  pain,  than  to  see 
it  coming. 

A  soldier  called,  a  morning  ago,  and  asked  for  a 
nosegay  to  take  to  battle.  I  suppose  he  thought  we 
kept  an  aquarium. 

How  sweet  it  must  be  to  one  to  come  home, 
whose  home  is  in  so  many  houses,  and  every  heart  a 
*  best  room.*  I  mean  you,  Mr  Bowles.  .  .  .  Have 
not  the  clovers  names  to  the  bees? 

Emily. 

Before  he  comes 

We  weigh  the  time, 

T  is  heavy,  and  *t  is  light. 

When  he  departs 

An  emptiness 

Is  the  superior  freight. 

Emily. 


i862]  TO  MR  AND  MRS  BOWLES  209 

While  asters 

On  the  hill 

Their  everlasting  fashions  set, 

And  covenant  gentians  frill  1 

Emily. 

[Late  Autumn,  1862.J 

So  glad  we  are,  a  stranger  'd  deem 
'T  was  sorry  that  we  were ; 
For  where  the  holiday  should  be 
There  publishes  a  tear ; 
Nor  how  ourselves  be  justified, 
Since  grief  and  joy  are  done 
So  similar,  an  optizan 
Could  not  decide  between. 

[Early  Winter,  1862.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  Had  we  the  art  like  you,  to 
endow  so  many,  by  just  recovering  our  health, 
'twould  give  us  tender  pride,  nor  could  we  keep 
the  news,  but  carry  it  to  you,  who  seem  to  us  to 
own  it  most. 
I  So  few  that  live  have  life,  it  seems  of  quick  im- 
portance not  one  of  those  escape  by  death.  And 
since  you  gave  us  fear,  congratulate  us  for  ourselves 
—  you  give  us  safer  peace. 

How  extraordinary  that  life's  large  population' 
contain  so  few  of  power  to  us  —  and  those  a  vivid 
species  who  leave  no  mode,  like  Tyrian  dye. 

Remembering  these  minorities,  permit  our  grati- 

VOL.  I.  — 14 


210  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1862 

tude  for  you.  We  ask  that  you  be  cautious,  for 
many  sakes,  excelling  ours.  To  recapitulate  the 
stars  were  useless  as  supreme.  Yourself  is  yours, 
dear  friend,  but  ceded,  is  it  not,  to  here  and  there  a 
minor  life  ?  Do  not  defraud  these,  for  gold  may  be 
bought,  and  purple  may  be  bought,  but  the  sale 
of  the  spirit  never  did  occur. 

Do  not  yet  work.  No  public  so  exorbitant  of 
any  as  its  friend,  and  we  can  wait  your  health. 
Besides,  there  is  an  idleness  more  tonic  than  toil. 

The  loss  of  sickness  —  was  it  loss  ? 
Or  that  ethereal  gain 
You  earned  by  measuring  the  grave, 
Then  measuring  the  sun. 

Be   sure,  dear  friend,  for  want  you  have  estates 

of  lives. 

Emily. 

[With  Flowers.] 

If  she  had  been  the  mistletoe. 

And  I  had  been  the  rose. 

How  gay  upon  your  table 

My  velvet  life  to  close  ! 

Since  I  am  of  the  Druid, 

And  she  is  of  the  dew, 

I  '11  deck  tradition's  buttonhole. 

And  send  the  rose  to  you. 

E. 

Dear  Mr  Bowles,  —  I  can't  thank  you  any 
more.      You  are    thoughtful  so   many  times  you 


i862]  TO  MR  AND  MRS  BOWLES  211 

grieve  me   always ;  ticHv  the  old  words  are  numb, 
and  there  are  n't  any  new  ones. 

Brooks  are  useless  in  freshet  time.  When  you 
come  to  Amherst —  please  God  it  were  to-day —  I 
will  tell  you  about  the  picture  —  if  I  can^  I  will. 

Speech  is  a  prank  of  Parliament, 
Tears  a  trick  of  the  nerve,  — 
But  the  heart  with  the  heaviest  freight  on 
Does  n*t  always  swerve. 

Emily. 

Perhaps  you  think  me  stooping  ! 

I  'm  not  ashamed  of  that ! 

Christ  stooped  until  he  touched  the  grave  ! 

Do  those  at  sacrament 

Commemorate  dishonor  — 

Or  love,  annealed  of  love. 

Until  it  bend  as  low  as  death 

Re-royalized  above  ? 

The  juggler's  hat  her  country  is, 
The  mountain  gorse  the  bee  *s. 

I  stole  them  from  a  bee, 

Because  —  thee ! 

Sweet  plea  — 

He  pardoned  me ! 

Emily. 

Besides  the  verses  given  here,  many  others 
were  sent  to  Mr  and  Mrs  Bowles,  as  to  the 
Hollands,  which,  having  already  been  published 


212  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON         [i86; 

in   one   or  the   other   volume   of  the  Poems 
will  not  be  reprinted. 

[Summer,  1863.] 

Dear  Friends,  —  I  am  sorry  you  came^  because 
you  went  away. 

Hereafter,  I  will  pick  no  rose,  lest  it  fade  or  pricl 
me. 

I  would  like  to  have  you  dwell  here. 

Though  it  is  almost  nine  o'clock,  the  skies  arc 
gay  and  yellow,  and  there  *s  a  purple  craft  or  so,  ir 
which  a  friend  could  sail.  To-night  looks  like 
'  Jerusalem' !  .  .  .  I  hope  we  may  all  behave  so  as 
to  reach  Jerusalem. 

How  are  your  hearts  to-day?  Ours  are  prettj 
well.  I  hope  your  tour  was  bright,  and  gladdened 
Mrs  Bowles.  Perhaps  the  retrospect  will  call  you 
back  some  morning. 

You  shall  find  us  all  at  the  gate  if  you  come  in  a 
hundred  years,  just  as  we  stood  that  day.  If  it 
become  of  'jasper'  previously,  you  will  not  object, 
so  that  we  lean  there  still,  looking  after  you. 

I  rode  with  Austin  this  morning.     He  showed  me 

mountains  that  touched  the  sky,  and  brooks  that 

sang  like  bobolinks.     Was   he   not   very  kind?     I 

will  give  them  to  you,  for  they  are  mine,  and  '  all 

things  are  mine,'  excepting  '  Cephas  and  ApoUos,' 

for  whom   I  have  no  taste.     Vinnie's  love  brims 

mine. 

Take 

Emuie. 


1863]  TO  MR  AND  MRS  BOWLES  213 

Dear  Mrs  Bowles, —  Since  I  have  no  sweet 
flower  to  send  you,  I  enclose  my  heart.  A  little 
one,  sunburnt,  half  broken  sometimes,  yet  close  as 
the  spaniel  to  its  friends.  Your  flowers  come  from 
heaven,  to  which,  if  I  should  ever  go,  I  will  pluck 
you  palms. 

My  words  are  far  away  when  I  attempt  to  thank 
you,  so  take  the  silver  tear  instead,  from  my  full  eye. 

You  have  often  remembered  me. 

I  have  little  dominion.  Are  there  not  wiser  than 
I,   who,   with  curious  treasure,  could  requite  your 

gift? 

Angels  All  the  hand  that  loaded 

Emily's. 

Nature  and  God,  I  neither  knew, 

Yet  both,  so  well  knew  me 

They  startled,  Uke  executors 

Of  an  identity. 

Yet  neither  told,  that  I  could  learn ; 

My  secret  as  secure 

As  Herschel's  private  interest. 

Or  Mercury's  affair. 

[1863.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  You  remembei;  the  little  '  meet- 
ing '  we  held  for  you  last  spring  ?  We  met  again, 
Saturday. 

'Twas  May  when  we  'adjourned,'  but  then  ad- 
journs are  all.  The  meetings  were  alike,  Mr 
Bowles. 


214  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1863 

The  topic  did  not  tire  us,  so  we  chose  no  new, 
We  voted  to  remember  you  so  long  as  both  should 
live,  including  immortality;  to  count  you  as  our- 
selves, except  sometimes  more  tenderly,  as  now, 
when  you  are  ill,  and  we,  the  haler  of  the  two  — 
and  so  I  bring  the  bond  we  sign  so  many  times,  for 
V'ou  to  read  when  chaos  comes,  or  treason,  or  decay, 
still  witnessing  for^  morning.  .  .  .  We  hope  our  joy 
to  see  you  gave  of  its  own  degree  to  you.  We  pray 
for  your  new  health,  the  prayer  that  goes  not  down 
when  they  shut  the  church.  We  offer  you  our  cups 
—  stintless,  as  to  the  bee,  —  the  lily,  her  new 
liquors. 

Would  you  like  summer?    Taste  of  ours. 

Spices?  Buy  here ! 

Ill !     We  have  berries,  for  the  parching  I 

Weary !     Furloughs  of  down  ! 

Perplexed !  Estates  of  violet  trouble  ne'er 
looked  on ! 

Captive  !     We  bring  reprieve  of  roses  1 

Fainting  !     Flasks  of  air ! 

Even  for  Death,  a  fairy  medicine. 

But,  which  is  it,  sir?  Emily. 

I  *11  send  the  feather  from  my  hat ! 

Who  knows  but  at  the  sight  of  that 

My  sovereign  will  relent? 

As  trinket,  worn  by  faded  child. 

Confronting  eyes  long  comforted 

Blisters  the  adamant ! 

Emily. 


1864]  TO  MR  AND  MRS  BOWLES  21$ 

Her  breast  is  fit  for  pearls, 
But  I  was  not  a  diver. 
Her  brow  is  fit  for  thrones, 
But  I  had  not  a  crest. 
Her  heart  is  fit  for  rest  — 
I,  a  sparrow,  build  there 
Sweet  of  twigs  and  twine, 
My  perennial  nest. 

[1864  ?] 

Dear  Friend,  —  How  hard  to  thank  you  —  but 
the  large  heart  requites  itself.  Please  to  need  me. 
I  wanted  to  ask  you  to  receive  Mr  Browning  from 
me,  but  you  denied  ray  Bronte  —  so  I  did  not  dare. 

Is  it  too  late  now?  I  should  like  so  much  to 
remind  you  how  kind  you  had  been  to  me. 

You  could  choose  —  as  you  did  before  —  if  it  would 
not  be  obnoxious  —  except  where  you  '  measured  by 
your  heart,*  you  should  measure  this  time  by  mine. 
I  wonder  which  would  be  biggest ! 

Austin  told,  Saturday  morning,  that  you  were  not 
so  well.  *T  was  sundown,  all  day,  Saturday  —  and 
Sunday  such  a  long  bridge  no  news  of  you  could 
cross ! 

Teach  us  to  miss  you  less  because  the  fear  to  miss 
you  more  haunts  us  all  the  time.  We  did  n*t  care 
so  much,  once.  I  wish  it  was  then,  now,  but  you 
kept  tightening,  so  it  can't  be  stirred  to-day.  You 
did  n't  mean  to  be  worse,  did  you  ?  Was  n*t  it  a 
mistake  ? 


2l6  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1864 

Won't  you  decide  soon  to  be  the  strong  man  we 
first  knew?  *T  would  lighten  things  so  much  —  and 
yet  that  man  was  not  so  dear  —  I  guess  you'd 
better  not. 

We  pray  for  you,  every  night.    A  homely  shrine 
our  knee,  but  Madonna  looks  at  the  heart  first 

Dear  friend  —  don't  discourage  ! 

Affectionately, 

Emily. 
No  wilderness  can  be 
Where  this  attendeth  thee  — 
No  desert  noon. 
No  fear  of  frost  to  come 
Haunt  the  perennial  bloom, 
But  certain  June  I 

Emily. 
The  following  lines,  sent  with  flowers,  have 
almost  as  quaint  and  *  seventeenth  century '  a 
flavor  as  the  now  famous  quatrain  beginning,  — 

'  A  death-blow  is  a  life-blow  to  some.' 

If  recollecting  were  forgetting 

Then  I  remember  not. 

And  if  forgetting,  recollecting, 

How  near  I  had  forgot ! 

And  if  to  miss  were  merry, 

And  if  to  mourn  were  gay. 

How  very  blithe  the  fingers 

That  gathered  this,  to-day ! 

Emilie. 


1864]  TO  MR  AND  MRS  BOWLES  21/ 

Other  verses,  sent  at  different  times,  were 
written  in  the  same  general  hand,  —  that  of 
the  early  middle  period,  from  about  1863  to 
1870;  among  them  :  — 

*  They  have  not  chosen  me,*  he  said, 

*  But  I  have  chosen  them.* 
Brave,  broken-hearted  statement 
Uttered  in  Bethlehem ! 

/  could  not  have  told  it, 

But  since  Jesus  dared. 

Sovereign  !  know  a  daisy 

Thy  dishonor  shared.  Emily. 

Saturday. 

Mother  never  asked  a  favor  of  Mr  Bowles  before 

—  that  he  accept  from  her  the  little  barrel  of  apples. 

'  Sweet  apples,*  she  exhorts  me,  with  an  occasional 

Baldwin  for  Mary  and  the  squirrels. 

Emily. 

Just  once  —  oh  !  least  request ! 

Could  adamant  refuse 

So  small  a  grace. 

So  scanty  put. 

Such  agonizing  terms? 

Would  not  a  God  of  flint 

Be  conscious  of  a  sigh. 

As  down  his  heaven  dropt  remote, 

'Just  once,  sweet  Deity? * 


^1 

I 


It; 

r 


I* 

M 
I 


.   • 


1 1 


1 1 


I 


^  ^^  ^ 


^ 


^r:^^^  f:&gt;:f /^-       ^ 


•  -^35^ 


'g^ 


^^ 


iv-- 


1865I  TO  MR  AND  MRS  BOWLES  219 

A  spray  of  white  pine  was  enclosed  with  this 
note :  — 

A  feather  from  the  whippoorwill 

That  everlasting  sings ! 

Whose  galleries  are  sunrise, 

Whose  opera  the  springs, 

Whose  emerald  nest  the  ages  spin 

Of  mellow,  murmuring  thread, 

Whose  beryl  egg,  what  school  boys-hunt 

In  *  recess  '  overhead  ! 

Emily. 

We  part  with  the  river  at  the  flood  through  a 
timid  custom,  though  with  the  same  waters  we  have 

often  played. 

Emily. 
[1865?] 

Dear  Friend,  —  Vinnie  accidentally  mentions 
that  you  hesitated  between  the  Theophilus  and 
the  Junius. 

Would  you  confer  so  sweet  a  favor  as  to  accept 
that  too,  when  you  come  again? 

I  went  to  the  room  as  soon  as  you  left,  to  conflrm 
your  presence,  recalling  the  Psalmist's  sonnet  to 
God  beginning 

I  have  no  life  but  this  — 
'         To  lead  it  here, 

Nor  any  death  but  lest 

Dispelled  from  there. 

Nor  tie  to  earths  to  come, 

Nor  action  new, 

Except  through  this  extent  — 

The  love  of  you. 


220  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1869 

It  is  Strange  that  the  most  mtangible  thing  is  the 

most  adhesive. 

Your  '  rascal.' 
I  washed  the  adjective. 

[1868  ?] 

I  should  think  you  would  have  few  letters,  for 
your  own  are  so  noble  that  they  make  men  afraid. 
And  sweet  as  your  approbation  is,  it  is  had  in  fear, 
lest  your  depth  convict  us. 

You  compel  us  each  to  remember  that  when 
water  ceases  to  rise,  it  has  commenced  falling. 
That  is  the  law  of  flood. 

The  last  day  that  I  saw  you  was  the  newest  and 
oldest  of  my  life. 

Resurrection  can  come  but  once,  first,  to  the 
same  house.     Thank  you  for  leading  us  by  it. 

Come  always,  dear  friend,  but  refrain  from  going. 
You  spoke  of  not  liking  to  be  forgotten.  Could 
you,  though  you  would? 

Treason  never  knew  you. 

I1869?) 

Dear  Friend, — You  have  the  most  triumphant 
face  out  of  Paradise,  probably  because  you  are 
there  constantly,  instead  of  ultimately. 

Ourselves  we  do  inter  with  sweet  derision  the 
channel  of  the  dust;  who  once  achieves,  invali- 
dates  the   balm   of  that   religion,   that   doubts  as 

fervently  as  it  believes. 

Emu^y. 


1873]  ^&lt;5  ^^  ^^^  ^^^  BOWLES  221 

Wednesday. 

Dear  Mr  Bowles's  note,  of  itself  a  blossom,  came 

only  to-night. 

I  am  glad  it  lingered,  for  each  was  all  the  heart 

could  hold. 

Emily. 

Of  your  exquisite  act  there  can  be  no  acknowl- 
edgment but  the  ignominy  that  grace  gives. 

Emily. 

Could  mortal  lip  divine 

The  undeveloped  freight 

Of  a  delivered  syllable, 

'T  would  crumble  with  the  weight ! 

[1873-] 

Dear  Friend,  —  It  was  so  delicious  to  see  you 
—  a  peach  before  the  time  —  it  makes  all  seasons 
possible,  and  zones  a  caprice. 

We,  who  arraign  the  Arabian  Nights  for  their  un- 
derstatement, escape  the  stale  sagacity  of  supposing 
them  sham. 

We  miss  your  vivid  face,  and  the  besetting  accents 
you  bring  from  your  Numidian  haunts. 

Your  coming  welds  anew  that  strange  trinket  of 
life  which  each  of  us  wear  and  none  of  us  own ; 
and  the  phosphorescence  of  yours  startles  us  for  its 
permanence. 

Please  rest  the  life  so  many  own  —  for  gems 
abscond. 


222  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1874 

In  your  own  beautiful  words  —  for  the  voice  is 
the  palace  of  all  of  us,  — 

*  Near,  but  remote.' 

Emily. 

[1874] 
Dear  Friend,  —  The  paper  wanders  so  I  cannot 
write  my  name  on  it,  so  I  give  you  father's  portrait 
instead. 

As  summer  into  autumn  slips 

And  yet  we  sooner  say 

'  The  summer  *  than  '  the  autumn,'  lest 

We  turn  the  sun  away. 

And  almost  count  it  an  affront 
The  presence  to  concede 
Of  one  however  lovely,  not 
The  one  that  we  have  loved,  — 

So  we  evade  the  charge  of  years. 

One,  one  attempting  shy 

The  circumvention  of  the  shaft 

Of  life's  declivity.  Emily. 

If  we  die,  will  you  come  for  us,  as  you  do  for 
father  ? 

'  Not  bom,'  yourself '  to  die,'  you  must  reverse  us 
all. 

Last  to  adhere 

When  summers  swerve  away  — 

Elegy  of 

Integrity. 


1878I  TO  MRS  BOWLES  223 


To  remember  our  own  Mr  Bowles  is  all  we  can  do. 

With  grief  it  is  done,  so  warmly  and  long,  it  can 

never  be  new. 

Emily. 

In  January  of  1878,  Mr  Bowles  died,  leaving 
a  sense  of  irreparable  loss,  not  only  to  his 
friends,  but  to  his  great  constituency  through 
The  Republican^  into  whose  success  he  had 
woven  the  very  tissue  of  his  own  magnetic 
personality. 

[January,  1878.] 

I  hasten  to  you,  Mary,  because  no  moment  must 
be  lost  when  a  heart  is  breaking,  for  though  it  broke 
so  long,  each  time  is  newer  than  the  last,  if  it  broke 
truly.  To  be  willing  that  I  should  speak  to  you  was 
so  generous,  dear. 

Sorrow  almost  resents  love,  it  is  so  inflamed.  1 

I  am  glad  if  the  broken  words  helped  you.  I 
had  not  hoped  so  much,  I  felt  so  faint  in  uttering 
them,  thinking  of  your  great  pain.  Love  makes  us 
'  heavenly '  without  our  trying  in  the  least.  *T  is 
easier  than  a  Saviour  —  it  does  not  stay  on  high  and 
call  us  to  its  distance ;  its  low  '  Come  unto  me  * 
begins  in  every  place.  It  makes  but  one  mistake, 
it  tells  us  it  is  '  rest '  —  perhaps  its  toil  is  rest,  but 
what  we  have  not  known  we  shall  know  again,  that 
divine  'again*  for  which  we  are  all  breathless. 

I   am   glad   you   *work.'     Work  is  a  bleak  re- 


224  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1878 

deemer,  but  it  does  redeem ;  it  tires  the  flesh  so 
that  can't  tease  the  spirit. 

Dear  '  Mr  Sam '  is  very  near,  these  midwinter 
days.  When  purples  come  on  Pelham,  in  the 
afternoon,  we  say  '  Mr  Bowles's  colors.'  I  spoke  to 
him  once  of  his  Gem  chapter,  and  the  beautiful 
eyes  rose  till  they  were  out  of  reach  of  mine,  in 
some  hallowed  fathom. 

Not  that  he  goes  —  we  love  him  more  who  led 
us  while  he  stayed.  Beyond  earth's  trafficking 
frontier,  for  what  he  moved,  he  made. 

Mother  is  timid  and  feeble,  but  we  keep  her  with 
us.  She  thanks  you  for  remembering  her,  and 
never  forgets  you.  .  .  .  Your  sweet  'and  left  me 
all  alone,'  consecrates  your  lips. 

Eboly. 

[Spring,  1878.] 

Had  you  never  spoken  to  any,  dear,  they  would 
not  upbraid  you,  but  think  of  you  more  softly,  as 
one  who  had  suffered  too  much  to  speak.  To  forget 
you  would  be  impossible,  had  we  never  seen  you ; 
for  you  were  his  for  whom  we  moan  while  con- 
sciousness remains.  As  he  was  himself  Eden,  he 
is  with  Eden,  for  we  cannot  become  what  we  were 
not. 

I  felt  it  sweet  that  you  needed  me  —  though  but  a 
simple  shelter  I  will  always  last.  I  hope  your  boys 
and  girls  assist  his  dreadful  absence,  for  sorrow  does 
not  stand  so  still  on  their  flying  hearts. 


i879]  TO  MRS  BOWLES  22$ 


How  fondly  we  hope  they  look  like  him  —  that 
his  beautiful  face  may  be  abroad. 

Was  not  his  countenance  on  earth  graphic  as 
a  spirit's?  The  time  will  be  long  till  you  see  him, 
dear,  but  it  will  be  short,  for  have  we  not  each  our 
heart  to  dress  —  heavenly  as  his  ? 

He  is  without  doubt  with  my  father.  Thank  you 
for  thinking  of  him,  and  the  sweet,  last  respect  you 
so  faithfully  paid  him. 

Mother  is  growing  better,  though  she  cannot 
stand,  and  has  not  power  to  raise  her  head  for  a 
glass  of  water.  She  thanks  you  for  being  sorry,  and 
speaks  of  you  with  love.  .  .  .  Your  timid  '  for  his 
sake,*  recalls  that  sheltering  passage,  'for  his  sake 
who  loved  us,  and  gave  himself  to  die  for  us.' 

Emily. 

[1879.1 

How  lovely  to  remember  !  How  tenderly  they 
told  of  you  !  Sweet  toil  for  smitten  hands  to  con- 
sole the  smitten  1 

Labors  as  endeared  may  engross  our  lost.  Buds 
of  other  days  quivered  in  remembrance.  Hearts 
of  other  days  lent  their  solemn  charm. 

Life  of  flowers  lain  in  flowers  —  what  a  home  of 
dew  !  And  the  bough  of  ivy ;  was  it  as  you  said  ? 
Shall  I  plant  it  softly  ? 

There  were  little  feet,  white  as  alabaster. 

Dare  I  chill  them  with  the  soil  ? 
VOL.  I.  — 15 


226  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [iS8a, 

Nature  is  our  eldest  mother,  she  will  do  no  harm. 
Let  the  phantom  love  that  enrolls  the  sparrow 
shield  you  softer  than  a  child. 

[April,  1880.] 

Dear  Mary,  —  The  last  April  that  father  lived, 
lived  I  mean  below,  there  were  several  snow-storms, 
and  the  birds  were  so  frightened  and  cold,  they  sat 
by  the  kitchen  door.  Father  went  to  the  bam  in 
his  slippers  and  came  back  with  a  breakfast  of  grain 
for  each,  and  hid  himself  while  he  scattered  it,  lest 
it  embarrass  them.  Ignorant  of  the  name  or  fate 
of  their  benefactor,  their  descendants  are  singing 
this  afternoon. 

As  I  glanced  at  your  lovely  gift,  his  April  re- 
turned.    I  am  powerless  toward  your  tenderness. 

Thanks  of  other  days  seem  abject  and  dim,  yet 
antiquest  altars  are  the  fragrantest.  The  past  has 
been  very  near  this  week,  but  not  so  near  as  the 
future  —  both  of  them  pleading,  the  latter  priceless. 

David's  grieved  decision  haunted  me  when  a  little 
girl.     I  hope  he  has  found  Absalom. 

Immortality  as  a  guest  is  sacred,  but  when  it 
becomes  as  with  you  and  with  us,  a  member  of 
the  family,  the  tie  is  more  vivid.  .  .  . 

If  affection  can  reinforce,  you,  dear,  shall  not 
fall. 

Emily. 


i88i]  TO  MRS  BOWLES  22/ 

[PraJbably  the  famous  *  Yellow  Day,"  September  6,  1881.] 

Tuesday, 

Dear  Mary,  —  I  give  you  only  a  word  this 
mysterious  morning  in  which  we  must  light  the 
lamps  to  see  each  other's  faces,  thanking  you  for 
the  trust  too  confiding  for  speech. 

You  spoke  of  enclosing  the  face  of  your  child. 
As  it  was  not  there,  forgive  me  if  I  tell  you,  lest 
even  the  copy  of  sweetness  abscond;  and  may  I 
trust  you  received  the  flower  the  mail  promised  to 
take  you,  my  foot  being  incompetent? 

The  timid  mistake  about  being  '  forgotten,'  shall 
I  caress  or  reprove  ?  Mr  SamuePs  '  sparrow  *  does 
not  '  fall '  without  the  fervent  *  notice.* 

'Would  you  see  us,  would  Vinnie?*  Oh,  my 
doubting  Mary !  Were  you  and  your  brave  son  in 
my  father's  house,  it  would  require  more  prowess 
than  mine  to  resist  seeing  you. 

Shall  I  still  hope  for  the  picture?  And  please 
address  to  my  full  name,  as  the  little  note  was 
detained  and  opened,  the  name  being  so  frequent  in 
town,  though  not  an  Emily  but  myself. 

Vinnie  says  'give  her  my  love,  and  tell  her  I 
would  delight  to  see  her;'  and  mother  combines. 

There  should  be  no  tear  on  your  cheek,  dear,  had 

my  hand  the  access  to  brush  it  away. 

Emily. 
[1881.] 

Dear  Mary,  —  To  have  been  the  mother  of  the 
beautiful  face,  is  of  itself  fame,   and  the  look  of 


228  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1881 

Arabia  in  the  eyes  is  like  Mr  Samuel.  *  Mr 
Samuel'  is  his  memorial  name.  'Speak,  that  we 
may  see  thee/  and  Gabriel  no  more  ideal  than  his 
swift  eclipse.  Thank  you  for  the  beauty,  which  I 
reluctantly  return,  and  feel  like  committing  a 
*  startling  fraud  *  in  that  sweet  direction.  If  her 
heart  is  as  magical  as  her  face,  she  will  wreck  many 
a  spirit,  but  the  sea  is  ordained. 

Austin  looked  at  her  long  and  earnestly. 

'  Yes,  it  is  Sam*s  child.'  His  Cashmere  confeder- 
ate. It  is  best,  dear,  you  have  so  much  to  do. 
Action  is  redemption. 

'  And  again  a  little  while  and  ye  shall  not  see  me,* 

Jesus  confesses  is  temporary. 

Thank  you  indeed. 

Ekoly. 


END   OF   VOLUME   I. 


LETTERS 


OF 


EMILY    DICKINSON 


Xaucm  n 


1859]  TO   THE  MISSES  23 1 

see  I  know  they  are  coming  back,  and  other  people 
don't,  that  makes  the  difference. 

I  Ve  had  a  curious  winter,  very  swift,  sometimes 
sober,  for  I  have  n't  felt  well,  much,  and  March 
amazes  me  !  I  did  n't  think  of  it,  that  *s  all !  Your 
*  hay  *  don't  look  so  dim  as  it  did  at  one  time.  I 
hayed  a  little  for  the  horse  two  Sundays  ago,  and 
mother  thought  it  was  summer,  and  set  one  plant 
outdoors  which  she  brought  from  the  deluge,  but 
it  snowed  since,  and  we  have  fine  sleighing,  now, 
on  one  side  of  the  road,  and  wheeling  on  the  other, 
a  kind  of  variegated  turnpike  quite  picturesque  to 
see  ! 

You  are  to  have  Vinnie,  it  seems,  and  I  to  tear  my 
hair,  or  engage  in  any  other  vocation  that  seems 
fitted  to  me.  Well,  the  earth  is  round,  so  if  Vinnie 
rolls  your  side  sometimes,  't  is  n't  strange ;  I  wish  I 
were  there  too,  but  the  geraniums  felt  so  I  could  n't 
think  of  leaving  them,  and  one  minute  carnation 
pink  cried,  till  I  shut  her  up  —  see  box ! 

Now,  my  love,  robins,  for  both  of  you,  and  when 

you  and  Vinnie  sing  at  sunrise  on  the  apple  boughs, 

just  cast  your  eye  to  my  twig. 

Poor  Plover. 

[Early  Summer,  1859.] 

Dear  L ,  —  You   did   not  acknowledge  my 

vegetable  ;  perhaps  you  are  not  familiar  with  it.  I  was 
reared  in  the  garden,  you  know.  It  was  to  be  eaten 
with  mustard !     Bush  eighty  feet   high,  just  under 


232  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1S59 

chamber  window  —  much  used  at  this  season  when 
other  vegetables  are  gone.  You  should  snuff  the 
hay  if  you  were  here  to-day,  infantile  as  yet,  homely, 
as  cubs  are  prone  to  be,  but  giving  brawny  promise 
of  hay-cocks  by  and  by.  *  Methinks  I  see  you,* 
as  school-girls  say,  perched  upon  a  cock  with  the 
Matest  work,'  and  confused  visions  of  bumblebees 
tugging  at  your  hat.  Not  so  far  off,  cousin,  as  it 
used  to  be,  that  vision  and  the  hat.  It  makes  me 
feel  so  hurried,  I  run  and  brush  my  hair  so  to  be 
all  ready. 

I  enjoy  much  with  a  precious  fly,  during  sister's 
absence,  not  one  of  your  blue  monsters,  but  a  timid 
creature,  that  hops  from  pane  to  pane  of  her  white 
house,  so  very  cheerfully,  and  hums  and  thrums,  a 
sort  of  speck  piano.  Tell  Vinnie  I  *11  kill  him  the 
day  she  comes,  for  I  sha'n't  need  him  any  more, 
and  she  don't  mind  flies ! 

Tell  F and  papa  to  come  with  the  sweet- 
williams. 

Tell  Vinnie  I  counted  three  peony  noses,  red  as 
Sammie  Matthews's,  just  out  of  the  ground,  and  get 
her  to  make  the  accompanying  face.     *  By-Bye.* 

Emily. 

Miss  Lavinia  Dickinson  was  visiting  her 
cousins  when  their  mother  died,  and  Emily's 
letter  to  her  sister  at  that  time  seems  more 
appropriate  here  than  in  any  other  con- 
nection :  — 


i860]  to   the  misses  233 

[April,  i860.] 

ViNNiE,  —  I  can't  believe  it,  when   your  letters 

come,  saying  what  Aunt  L said  'just  before 

she    died.*      Blessed   Aunt    L now;    all   the 

world  goes  out,  and  I  see  nothing  but  her  room, 
and  angels  bearing  her  into  those  great  countries 
in  the  blue  sky  of  which  we  don't  know  anything. 

Then  I  sob  and  cry  till  I  can  hardly  see  my  way 
'round  the  house  again ;  and  then  sit  still  and  won- 
der if  she  sees  us  now,  if  she  sees  me,  who  said  that 
she  *  loved  Emily.'  Oh !  Vinnie,  it  is  dark  and 
strange  to  think  of  summer  afterward  !  How  she 
loved  the  summer !  The  birds  keep  singing  just 
the  same.     Oh  !  The  thoughtless  birds  ! 

Poor  little  L !  Poor  F !  You  must  com- 
fort them  ! 

If  you  were  with  me,  Vinnie,  we  could  talk  about 
her  together. 

And  I  thought  she  would  live  !  I  wanted  her  to 
live  so,  I  thought  she  could  not  die !  To  think  how 
still  she  lay  while  I  was  making  the  little  loaf,  and 
fastening  her  flowers !  Did  you  get  my  letter  in 
time  to  tell  her  how  happy  I  would  be  to  do  what 
she  requested?  Mr  Brady  is  coming  to-morrow  to 
bring  arbutus  for  her.  Dear  little  aunt !  Will  she 
look  down? 

You  must  tell  me  all  you  can  think  about  her. 
Did  she  carry  my  little  bouquet  ?  So  many  broken- 
hearted people  have  got  to  hear  the  birds  sing,  and 


234  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [i86a 


see  all  the  little  flowers  grow,  just  the  same  as  if  the 
sun  had  n*t  stopped  shining  forever !  •  .  .  How  I 
wish  I  could  comfort  you  !  How  I  wish  you  could 
comfort  me,  who  weep  at  what  I  did  not  see  and 
never  can  believe.  I  will  try  and  share  you  a  little 
longer,  but  it  is  so  long,  Vinnie. 

We  did  n*t  think,  that  morning  when  I  wept  that 
you  left  me,  and  you,  for  other  things,  that  we  should 
weep  more  bitterly  before  we  saw  each  other. 

Well,  she  is  Siifer  now  than  *we  know  or  even 
think.*  Tired  little  aunt,  sleeping  ne'er  so  peace- 
ful !  Tuneful  little  aunt,  singing,  as  we  trust,  hymns 
than  which  the  robins  have  no  sweeter  ones. 

Good-night,  broken   hearts,  L        ,  and  F , 

and  Uncle  L .     Vinnie,  remember 

Sister. 

[Autumn,  i860.] 

Bravo,  L ,  the  cape  is  a  beauty,  and  what  shall 

I  render  unto  F ,  for  all  her  benefits  ?  I  will  take 

my  books  and  go  into  a  comer  and  give  thanks ! 
Do  you  think  I  am  going  *  upon  the  boards  *  that 
I  wish  so  smart  attire?  Such  are  my  designs, 
though.     I  beg  you  not  to  disclose  them  1     May  I 

not  secure  L for  drama,  and  F for  comedy? 

You  are  a  brace  of  darlings,  and  it  would  give  me  joy 
to  see  you  both,  in  any  capacity.  .  .  .  Will  treasure 
all  till  I  see  you.  Never  fear  that  I  shall  forget ! 
In  event  of  my  decease,  I  will  still  exclaim  *Dr 
Thompson,'  and  he  will   reply   'Miss   Montague.' 


i86o]  TO   THE  MISSES  235 


My  little  L pined  for  the  hay  in  her  last  com- 
munication. Not  to  be  saucy,  dear,  we  sha'n't  have 
any  more  before  the  first  of  March,  Dick  having  hid 
it  all  in  the  bam  in  a  most  malicious  manner ;  but 
he  has  not  brought  the  sunset  in,  so  there  is  still  an 
inducement  to  my  little  girls.  We  have  a  sky  or 
two,  well  worth  consideration,  and  trees  so  fashion- 
able they  make  us  all  passee, 

I  often  remember  you  both,  last  week.  I  thought 
that  flown  mamma  could  not,  as  was  her  wont, 
shield  from  crowd,  and  strangers,  and  was  glad  Eliza 
was  there.  I  knew  she  would  guard  my  children, 
as  she  has  often  guarded  me,  from  publicity,  and 
help  to  fill  the  deep  place  never  to  be  full.  Dear 
cousins,  I  know  you  both  better  than  I  did,  and 
love  you  both  better,  and  always  I  have  a  chair 
for  you  in  the  smallest  parlor  in  the  world,  to  wit, 
my  heart. 

This  world  is  just  a  little  place,  just  the  red  in 
the  sky,  before  the  sun  rises,  so  let  us  keep  fast 
hold  of  hands,  that  when  the  birds  begin,  none  of 
us  be  missing. 

*  Bumham  '  must  think  F a  scholastic  female. 

I  would  n't  be  in  her  place  !  If  she  feels  delicate 
about  it,  she  can  tell  him  the  books  are  for  a  friend 
in  the  East  Indies. 

Won't  F give  my  respects  to  the  '  Bell  and 

Everett  party '  if  she  passes  that  organization  on  her 
way  to  school?  I  hear  they  wish  to  make  me 
Lieutenant-Governor's    daughter.     Were   they  cats 


236  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1861 

I  would  pull  their  tails,  but  as  they  are  only  patriots, 
I  must  forego  the  bliss.  .  .  . 

Love  to  papa.  Emily. 

[Winter,  1860-61.] 

Dear  Friends, — L 's  note  to  Miss  W only 

stopped  to  dine.  It  went  out  with  a  beautiful  name 
on  its  face  in  the  evening  mail.  *  Is  there  nothing 
else,'  as  the  clerk  says?  So  pleased  to  enact  a 
trifle  for  my  little  sister.     It  is  little  sisters  you  are, 

as  dear  F says  in  the  hallowed  note.     Could 

mamma  read  it,  it  would  blur  her  light  even  in 
Paradise. 

It  was  pretty  to  lend  us  the  letters  from  the  new 
friends.  It  gets  us  acquainted.  We  will  preserve 
them  carefully.  ...  I  regret  I  am  not  a  scholar  in 
the  Friday  class.  I  believe  the  love  of  God  may 
be  taught  not  to  seem  like  bears.  Happy  the 
reprobates  under  that  loving  influence. 

I  have  one  new  bird  and  several  trees  of  old 
ones.  A  snow  slide  from  the  roof,  dispelled 
mother's  '  sweetbrier.'  You  will  of  course  feel 
for  her,  as  you  were  named  for  him  1  There  are 
as  yet  no  streets,  though  the  sun  is  riper,  and  these 
small  bells  have  rung  so  long  I  think  it  '  tea-time ' 
always. 

[Spring,  1861.] 

.  .  .  Send  a  sundown  for  L ^  please,  and  a 

crocus  for  F .    Shadow  had  no  stem,  so  they 

could  not  pick  him. 


i86i]  TO   THE  MISSES  237 

fed  greedily  upon  Harper's  Magazines 


while  here.  Suppose  he  is  restricted  to  Martin 
Luther's  works  at  home.  It  is  a  criminal  thing 
to  be  a  boy  in  a  godly  village,  but  maybe  he  will 
be  forgiven. 

.  .  .  The  seeing  pain  one  can't  relieve  makes 
a  demon  of  one.  If  angels  have  the  heart  beneath 
their  silver  jackets,  I  think  such  things  could  make 
them  weep,  but  Heaven  is  so  cold  !  It  will  never 
look  kind  to  me  that  God,  who  causes  all,  denies 
such  little  wishes.  It  could  not  hurt  His  glory,  unless 
it  were  a  lonesome  kind.     I  'most  conclude  it  is. 

.  .  .  Thank  you  for  the  daisy.  With  nature 
in  my  ruche  I  shall  not  miss  the  spring.  What 
would  become  of  us,  dear,  but  for  love  to  reprieve 
our  blunders? 

...  I'm  afraid  that  home  is  'most  done, 
but  do  not  say  I  fear  so.  Perhaps  God  will  be 
better.  They  're  happy,  you  know.  That  makes  it 
doubtful.  Heaven  hunts  round  for  those  that  find 
itself  below,  and  then  it  snatches. 

.  .  .  Think  Emily  lost  her  wits  —  but  she 
found  'em,  likely.  Don't  part  with  wits  long  in  this 
neighborhood. 

.  .  .  Your  letters  are  all  real,  just  the  tangled 
road  children  walked  before  you,  some  of  them  to 


238  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1861 

the  end,  and  others  but  a  little  way,  even  as  far  as 
the  fork  in  the  road.  That  Mrs  Browning  fainted, 
we  need  not  read  Aurora  Leigh  to  know,  when 
she  lived  with  her  English  aunt ;  and  George  Sand 
*  must  make  no  noise  in  her  grandmother's  bed- 
room.' Poor  children  !  Women,  now,  queens,  now  ! 
And  one  in  the  Eden  of  God.  I  guess  they  both 
forget  that  now,  so  who  knows  but  we,  little  stars 
from  the  same  night,  stop  twinkling  at  last  ?  Take 
heart,  little  sister,  twilight  is  but  the  short  bridge,  and 
the  moon  stands  at  the  end.  If  we  can  only  get  to 
her !  Yet,  if  she  sees  us  fainting,  she  will  put  out 
her  yellow  hands.  .  .  . 


[December,  1861.] 

Dear  Peacock,  —  I  received  your  feather  with 
profound  emotion.  It  has  already  surmounted  a 
work,  and  crossed  the  Delaware.  Doubtless  you 
are  moulting  a  la  canary  bird  —  hope  you  will  not 
suffer  from  the  reduction  of  plumage  these  December 
days.  The  latitude  is  quite  stiff  for  a  few  nights, 
and  gentlemen  and  ladies  who  go  barefoot  in  our 
large  cities  must  find  the  climate  uncomfortable.  A 
land  of  frosts  and  zeros  is  not  precisely  the  land  for 
me ;  hope  you  find   it  congenial.     I   believe   it  is 

several  hundred  years  since- 1  met  you  and  F ^ 

yet  I  am  pleased  to  say,  you  do  not  become  dim ; 
I  think  you  rather  brighten  as  the  hours  fly.  I  should 
love  to  see  you  dearly,  girls ;  perhaps  I  may,  before 


i86i]  TO   THE  MISSES  239 

south  winds,  but  I  feel  rather  confused  to-day,  and 
the  future  looks  '  higglety-pigglety/ 

You  seem  to  take  a  smiling  view  of  my  finery.  If 
you  knew  how  solemn  it  was  to  me,  you  might  be 
induced  to  curtail  your  jests.  My  sphere  is  doubt- 
less calicoes,  nevertheless  I  thought  it  meet  to  sport 
a  little  wool.  The  mirth  it  has  occasioned  will 
deter  me  from  further  exhibitions  !  Won't  you  tell 
*  the  public  '  that  at  present  I  wear  a  brown  dress 
with  a  cape  if  possible  browner,  and  carry  a  parasol 
of  the  same  !  We  have  at  present  one  cat,  and 
twenty- four  hens,  who  do  nothing  so  vulgar  as  lay 
an  egg,  which  checks  the  ice-cream  tendency. 

I  miss  the  grasshoppers  much,  but  suppose  it  is 
all  for  the  best.  I  should  become  too  much  at- 
tached to  a  trotting  world. 

My  garden   is  all  covered  up  by  snow ;  picked  ^ 
gilliflower    Tuesday,    now    gilliflowers    are    asleep. 
The  hills  take  off  their  purple  frocks,  and  dress  in 
long  white  nightgowns. 

There  is  something  fine  and  something  sad  in  the 
year's  toilet.  .  .  . 

We  often  talk  of  you  and  your  father  these  new 
winter  days.      Write,  dear,  when  you  feel  like  it. 

Lovingly, 

Emily. 

[December  29,  1861.] 
.  .  .  Your  letter  did  n't  surprise  me,  L ;   I 


brushed  away  the  sleet  from  eyes  familiar  with  it  — - 


240  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1861 

looked  again  to  be  sure  I  read  it  right — and  then 
took  up  my  work  hemming  strings  for  mother's 
gown.  I  think  I  hemmed  them  faster  for  knowing 
you  were  n't  coming,  my  fingers  had  nothing  else  to 
do.  .  .  .  Odd,  that  I,  who  say  '  no  *  so  much,  cannot 
bear  it  from  others.  Odd,  that  I,  who  run  from  so 
many,  cannot  brook  that  one  turn  from  me.     Come 

when  you  will,  L ,  the  hearts  are  never  shut  here. 

I  don't  remember  'May.*  Is  that  the  one  that 
stands  next  April  ?  And  is  that  the  month  for  the 
river-pink  ? 

Mrs  Adams  had  news  of  the  death  of  her  boy 
to-day,  from  a  wound  at  Annapolis.  Telegram 
signed  by  Frazer  Steams.  You  remember  him. 
Another  ong^K^d  in  October  —  from  fever  caught  in 
the  earner  Mrs  Adams  herself  has  not  risen  from  bed 
since  yftien.  '  Happy  new  year  *  step  softly  over 
such  doors  as  these  !  '  Dead  !  Both  her  boys  ! 
One  of  them  shot  by  the  sea  in  the  East,  and  one 
of  them  shot  in  the  West  by  the  sea.*  .  .  .  Christ  be 
merciful !  Frazer  Stearns  is  just  leaving  Annapolis. 
His  father  has  gone  to  see  him  to-day.  I  hope  that 
ruddy  face  won't  be  brought  home  frozen.  Poor 
little  widow's  boy,  riding  to-night  in  the  mad 
wind,  back  to  the  village  burying-ground  where  he 
never  dreamed  of  sleeping  1  Ah !  the  dreamless 
sleep ! 

Did  you  get  the  letter  I  sent  a  week  fix)m 
Monday?  You  did  not  say,  and  it  makes  me 
anxious,  and  I  sent  a  scrap  for  Saturday  last,  that 


i862]  TO   THE  MISSES  24 1 

too  ?     L ,  I  wanted  you  very  much,  and  I  put  you 

by  with  sharper  tears  than  I  give  to  many.     Won't 

you  tell  me  about  the  chills  —  what  the  doctor  says  ?  I 

must  not  lose  you,  sweet.     Tell  me  if  I  could  send  a 

tuft  to  keep  the  cousin  warm,  a  blanket  of  a  thistle, 

say,  or  something ! 

Much  love  and  Christmas,  and  sweet  year,  for  you 

and  F and  papa. 

Emilie. 

Dear  little  F 's  note  received,  and  shall  write 

her  soon. 

Meanwhile,  we  wrap  her  in  our  heart  to  keep  her 
tight  and  warm. 

.  .  .  Uncle  told  us  you  were  too  busy.  Fold  your 
little  hands  —  the  heart  is  the  only  workman  we 
cannot  excuse. 

.  .  .  Gratitude  is  not  the  mention  of  a  tender- 
ness, but  its  mute  appreciation,  deeper  than  we 
reach  —  all  our  Lord  demands,  who  sizes  better 
knows  than  we.  Willing  unto  death,  if  only  we  per- 
ceive He  die. 

[February,  1862.] 

Dear  F ,  —  I  fear  you  are  getting  as  driven 

as  Vinnie.     We  consider  her  standard   for  super- 
human  effort   erroneously   applied.      Dear   L 

remembers  the  basket  Vinnie  '  never  got  to.*     But 
we  must  blame  with  lenience.      Poor  Vinnie   has 


242  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1863 

been  very  sick,  and  so  have  we  all,  and  I  feared  one 
day  our  little  brothers  would  see  us  no  more,  but 
God  was  not  so  hard.  Now  health  looks  so  beau- 
tiful, the  tritest  '  How  do  you  do '  is  living  with 
meaning.  No  doubt  you  *  heard  a  bird,'  but  which 
route  did  he  take  ?  Has  n't  reached  here  yet.  Are 
you  sure  it  was  n't  a  '  down  brakes  *  ?  Best  of  ears 
will  blunder  !  Unless  he  come  by  the  first  of  April, 
I  sha'n't  countenance  him.  We  have  had  fetal 
weather  —  thermometer  two  below  zero  all  day, 
without  a  word  of  apology.  Summer  was  always 
dear,  but  such  a  kiss  as  she  '11  get  from  me  if  I  ever 
see  her  again,  will  make  her  cry,  I  know.  .  .  . 

[April,  1862.] 

Dear  Children, — You  have  done  more  for  me 

—  't  is  least  that  I  can  do,  to  tell  you  of  brave  Frazer 

—  *  killed  at  Newbem,'  darlings.  His  big  heart  shot 
away  by  a  '  Minie  ball.' 

I  had  read  of  those  —  I  did  n't  think  that  Frazer 
would  carry  one  to  Eden  with  him.  Just  as  he 
fell,  in  his  soldier's  cap,  with  his  sword  at  his 
side,  Frazer  rode  through  Amherst.  Classmates  to 
the  right  of  him,  and  classmates  to  the  left  of 
him,  to  guard  his  narrow  face  !  He  fell  by  the 
side  of  Professor  Clark,  his  superior  officer — lived 
ten  minutes  in  a  soldier's  arms,  asked  twice  for 
water  —  murmured  just,  *  My  God  !  *  and  passed  ! 
Sanderson,  his  classmate,  made  a  box  of  boards  in 
the   night,  put  the  brave  boy  in,  covered  with  a 


1 862]  TO   THE  MISSES  243 

blanket,  rowed  six  miles  to  reach  the  boat,  —  so 
poor  Frazer  came.  They  tell  that  Colonel  Clark 
cried  like  a  little  child  when  he  missed  his  pet,  and 
could  hardly  resume  his  post.  They  loved  each 
other  very  much.  Nobody  here  could  look  on 
Frazer  —  not  even  his  father.  The  doctors  would 
not  allow  it. 

The  bed  on  which  he  came  was  enclosed  in  a  large 
casket  shut  entirely,  and  covered  from  head  to  foot 
with  the  sweetest  flowers.  He  went  to  sleep  from 
the  village  church.  Crowds  came  to  tell  him  good- 
night, choirs  sang  to  him,  pastors  told  how  brave 
he  was — early-soldier  heart.  And  the  family  bowed 
their  heads,  as  the  reeds  the  wind  shakes. 

So  our  part  in  Frazer  is  done,  but  you  must  come 
next  summer,  and  we  will  mind  ourselves  of  this 
young  crusader  —  too  brave  that  he  could  fear  to  die. 
We  will  play  his  tunes  —  maybe  he  can  hear  them ; 
we  will  try  to  comfort  his  broken-hearted  Ella,  who, 
as  the  clergyman  said,  'gave  him  peculiar  confi- 
dence.' .  .  .  Austin  is  stunned  completely.  Let  us 
love  better,  children,  it 's  most  that 's  left  to  do. 

Love  from  Emily. 

,  .  .  Sorrow  seems  more  general  than  it  did,  and 
not  the  estate  of  a  few  persons,  since  the  war 
began;  and  if  the  anguish  of  others  helped  one 
with  one's  own,  now  would  be  many  medicines. 

'T  is  dangerous  to  value,  for  only  the  precious  can 
alarm.     I  noticed  that  Robert  Browning  had  made 


/ 


244  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON         [1861 

another  poem,  and  was  astonished  —  till  I  remem- 
bered that  I,  myself,  in  my  smaller  way,  sang  off 
chamel  steps.  Every  day  life  feels  mightier,  and 
what  we  have  the  power  to  be,  more  stupendous. 

[May,  1862.] 

When  you  can  leave  your  little  children,  L , 


you  must  tell  us  all  you  know  about  dear  Myra's 
going,  so  sudden,  and  shocking  to  us  all,  we  are 
only  bewildered  and  cannot  believe  the  telegrams. 
I  want  so  much  to  see  you,  and  ask  you  what  it 
means,  and  why  this  young  life's  sacrifice  should 
come  so  soon,  and  not  far  off.  I  wake  in  the 
morning  saying  *  Myra,  no  more  Myra  in  this 
world,'  and  the  thought  of  that  young  face  in  the 
dark,  makes  the  whole  so  sorrowful,  I  cover  my  face 
with  the  blanket,  so  the  robins'  singing  cannot  get 
through  —  I  had  rather  not  hear  it.  Was  Myia 
willing  to  leave  us  all?  I  want  so  much  to  know  if 
it  was  very  hard,  husband  and  babies  and  big  life 
and  sweet  home  by  the  sea.  I  should  think  she 
would  rather  have  stayed.  .  .  .  She  came  to  see  us  first 
in  May.  I  remember  her  frock,  and  how  prettily 
she  fixed  her  hair,  and  she  and  Vinnie  took  long 
walks,  and  got  home  to  tea  at  sundown ;  and  now 
remembering  is  all  there  is,  and  no  more  Myra.     I 

wish  't  was  plainer,  L ,  the  anguish  in  this  world. 

I  wish  one  could  be  sure  the  suffering  had  a  loving 
side.    The  thought  to  look  down  some  day,  and 


i862]  TO   THE  MISSES  245 

see  the  crooked  steps  we  came,  from  a  safer  place, 
must  be  a  precious  thing.  .  .  . 

L ,  you  are  a  dear  child  to  go  to  Uncle  J , 

and  all  will  thank  you,  who  love  him.  We  will  re- 
member you  every  day,  and  the  little  children,  and 
make  a  picture  to  ourself,  of  the  small  mamma.  .  .  . 
Father  and  Vinnie  would  have  gone  immediately  to 
Lynn,  but  got  the  telegram  too  late.  Tell  Uncle 
they  wanted  to.  But  what  can  Emily  say?  Their 
Father  in  Heaven  remember  them  and  her. 

My  little  girls  have  alarmed  me  so  that  notwith- 
standing the  comfort  of  Austin's  assurance  that 
'they  will  come/  I  am  still  hopeless  and  scared, 
and  regard  Commencement  as  some  vast  anthropic 
bear,  ordained  to  eat  me  up.  What  made  *em  scare" 
'em  so?  Did  n't  they  know  Cousin  Aspen  could  n't 
stand  alone  ?  I  remember  a  tree  in  McLean  Street, 
when  you  and  we  were  a  little  girl,  whose  leaves 
went  topsy-turvy  as  often  as  a  wind,  and  showed  an 

ashen  side  —  that 's  fright,  that 's  Emily.    L and 

F were  that  wind,  and  the  poor   leaf,  who? 

Won't  they  stop  a'  blowing  ?  .  .  .  Commencement 
would  be  a  dreary  spot  without  my  double  flower,  that 
sows  itself,  and  just  comes  up,  when  Emily  seeks  it 
most.  Austin  gives  excellent  account,  I  trust  not 
overdrawn.  'Health  and  aspect  admirable,  and 
lodgings  very  fine.'  Says  the  rooms  were  marble, 
even  to  the  flies.     Do  they  dwell  in  Carrara  ?     Did 

they  find  the  garden  in  the  gown  ?     Should  have 
VOL.  II. — 2 


246  LETTERS  OP  BMiLY  DiCKlNSOI^  [1863 

sent  a  fann,  but  feared  for  our  button-hole.  Hope 
to  hear  favorable  news  on  receipt  of  this.  Please 
give  date  of  coming,  so  we  might  prepare  our  heart 

Emily. 

[July,  1862?] 

.  .  .  Just  a  word  for  my  children,  before  the  mails 

shut.    L left  a  tumbler  of  sweet-peas  on  the 

green  room  bureau.  I  am  going  to  leave  them  there 
till  they  make  pods  and  sow  themselves  in  the 
upper  drawer,  and  then  I  guess  they'll  blossom 
about  Thanksgiving  time.  There  was  a  thunder- 
shower  here  Saturday  at  car-time,  and  Emily  was 
glad  her  little  ones  had  gone  before  the  hail  and 
rain,  lest  it  frighten  them.  .  .  .  We  wish  the  visit  had 
just  begun  instead  of  ending  now ;  next  time  we  '11 
leave  *  the  mountains '  out,  and  tell  good  Dr  Gregg 

to  recommend  the  orchards.     I  defrauded  L of 

I  spool  of  thread;  we  will  'settle,*  however — and 

F *s  ruff  is  set  high  in  my  book  of  remembrance. 

They  must  be  good  children  and  recollect,  as  they 
agreed,  and  grow  so  strong  in  health  that  Emily 
won't  know  them  when  they  show  again.  .  .  .  Such 
a  purple  morning  —  even  to  the  morning-glory  that 
climbs  the  cherry-tree.  The  cats  desire  love  to 
F .  Emily. 

[About  May  30,  1863.] 

I  said  I  should  come  '  in  a  day.*     Emily  never 
fails  except  for  a  cause ;  that  you  know^  dear  L . 


1863]  TO  THE  MISSES  24/ 

The  nights  turned  hot,  when  Vinnie  had  gone, 
and  I  must  keep  no  window  raised  for  fear  of 
prowling  '  booger/  and  I  must  shut  my  door  for 
fear  front  door  slide  open  on  me  at  the  '  dead  of 
night,'  and  I  must  keep  *gas*  burning  to  light  the 
danger  up,  so  I  could  distinguish  it  —  these  gave 
me  a  snarl  in  the  brain  which  don't  unravel  yet,  and 
that  old  nail  in  my  breast  pricked  me ;  these,  dear, 
were  my  cause.  Truth  is  so  best  of  all  I  wanted 
you  to  know.     Vinnie  will  tell  of  her  visit.  .  .  . 

About  Commencement,  children,  I  can  have  no 
doubt,  if  you  should  fail  me  then,  my  little  life  would 
fail  of  itself.  Could  you  only  lie  in  your  little^  bed 
and  smile  at  me,  that  would  be  support.  Tell  the 
doctor  I  am  inexorable,  besides  I  shall  heal  you 
quicker  than  he.     You  need  the  balsam  word.    And 

who  is  to  cut  the  cake,  ask  F ,  and  chirp  to 

those  trustees  ?  Tell  me,  dears,  by  the  coming  mail, 
that  you  will  not  fail  me.  .  .  . 

Jennie  Hitchcock's  mother  was  buried  yesterday, 

so  there  is  one  orphan  more,  and  her  father  is  veiy 

sick  besides.     My  father  and  mother  went  to  the 

service,  and  mother  said  while  the  minister  prayed, 

a  hen  with  her  chickens  came  up,  and  tried  to  fly 

into  the  window.     I  suppose  the  dead  lady  used  to 

feed  them,  and  they  wanted  to  bid  her  good-by. 

Life  is  death  we  *re  lengthy  at, 
Death  the  hinge  to  life. 

Love  from  all, 

Emily. 


248  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1863 

[Autumn,  1863.] 

Wednesday, 

Dear  Children,  —  Nothing  has  happened  but 
loneliness,  perhaps  too  daily  to  relate.  Carlo  is 
consistent,  has  asked  for  nothing  to  eat  or  drink, 
since  you  went  away.  Mother  thinks  him  a  model 
dog,  and  conjectures  what  he  might  have  been,  had 
not  Vinnie  '  demora,U7.*»d  *  him.  Margaret  objects  to 
furnace  heat  on  account  of  bone  decrepitudes,  so  I 
dwell  in  my  bonnet   and   suffer  comfortably.  .  .  . 

Miss  Kingman  called  last  evening  to  inspect  your 
garden ;  I  gave  her  a  lanthom,  and  she  went  out, 
and  thanks  you  very  much.  No  one  has  called  so 
far,  but  one  old  lady  to  look  at  a  house.  I  directed 
her  to  the  cemetery  to  spare  expense  of  moving. 

I  got  down  before  father  this  morning,  and  spent 
a  few  moments  profitably  with  the  South  Sea  rose. 
Father  detecting  me,  advised  wiser  employment,  and 
read  at  devotions  the  chapter  of  the  gentleman  with 
one  talent.  I  think  he  thought  my  conscience 
would  adjust  the  gender. 

Margaret  washed  to-day,  and  accused  Vinnie  of 
calicoes.  I  put  her  shoe  and  bonnet  in  to  have 
them  nice  when  she  got  home.     I  found  a  milliner's 

case  in  Miss  N *s  wardrobe,  and  have  opened 

business.  I  have  removed  a  geranium  leaf,  and  sup- 
plied a  lily  in  Vinnie's  parlor  vase.  The  sweet-peas 
are  unchanged.  Cattle-show  is  to-morrow.  The 
coops  and  committees  are  passing  now.  .  .  .  They 
are  picking  the  Baldwin  apples.     Be  good  children. 


i863]  TO   THE  MISSES  249 

and  mind  the  vicar.   Tell  me  precisely  how  Wakefield 

looks,  since  I  go  not  myself. 
;f  Emily. 

[Autumn,  1863.] 

...  I  should  be  wild  with  joy  to  see  my  little 
lovers.  The  writing  them  is  no*  so  sweet  as  their 
two  faces  that  seem  so  small  way  off,  and  yet  have 
been  two  weeks  from  me  —  ♦^"  '^  wishful,  wandering 
weeks.     Now,  I  begin  to  doubt  if  they  ever  came. 

I  bid  the  stiff '  good-night  *  and  the  square  *  good- 
morning  »  to  the  lingering  guest,  I  finish  mamma's 
sack,  all  but  the  overcasting  —  that  fatal  sack,  you 
recollect.  I  pick  up  tufts  of  mignonette,  and  sweet 
alyssum  for  winter,  dim  as  winter  seems  these  red, 
and  gold,  and  ribbon  days. 

I  am  sure  I  feel  as  Noah  did,  docile,  but  some- 
what sceptic,  under  the  satinet. 

No  frost  at  our  house  yet.  Thermometer  frost, 
I  mean.     Mother  had  a  new  tooth  Saturday.     You 

know  Dr  S had  promised  her  one  for  a  long 

time.  '  Teething  *  did  n't  agree  with  her,  and  she 
kept  her  bed,  Sunday,  with  a  face  that  would  take 
a  premium  at  any  cattle-show  in  the  land.  Came 
to  town  next  morning  with  slightly  reduced  features, 
but  no  eye  on  the  left  side.  Doubtless  we  are 
'fearfully  and  wonderfully  made,*  and  occasionally 
grotesquely. 

L goes    to  Sunderland,  Wednesday,   for    a 

minute  or  two ;  leaves  here  at  half-past  six  —  what 
a  fitting  hour  —  and  will  breakfast  the  night  before ; 


2 so  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DldCINSON  [1864 

such  a  smart  atmosphere  !  The  trees  stand  right 
up  straight  when  they  hear  her  boots,  and  will  bear 
crockery  wares  instead  of  fruit,  I  fear.  She  hasn't 
starched  the  geraniums  yet,  but  will  have  ample 
time,  unless  she  leaves  before  April.  Emily  is  very 
mean,  and  her  children  in  dark  must  n't  remember 
what  she  says  about  damsel. 

Grateful  for  little  notes,  and  shall  ask  for  longer 
when  my  birds  locate.  Would  it  were  here.  Three 
sisters  are  prettier  than  one.  .  .  .  Tabby  is  a  contin- 
ual shrine,  and  her  jaunty  ribbons  put  me  in  mind 

of  fingers  far  out  at  sea.     F 's  admonition  made 

me  laugh  and  cry  too.  In  the  hugest  haste,  and  the 
engine  waiting.  Emily. 

[After  the  death  of  the  Misses 's  father,  Jan.  1864.] 

What  shall  I  tell  these  darlings  except  that  my 
father  and  mother  are  half  their  father  and  mother, 
and  my  home  half  theirs,  whenever,  and  for  as  long 
as,  they  will.  And  sometimes  a  dearer  thought  than 
that  creeps  into  my  mind,  but  it  is  not  for  to-night. 
Wasn't  dear  papa  so  tired  always  after  mamma 
went,  and  was  n't  it  almost  sweet  to  think  of  the  two 
together  these  new  winter  nights?  The  grief  is  our 
side,  darlings,  and  the  glad  is  theirs.  Vinnie  and  I 
sit  down  to-night,  while  mother  tells  what  makes  us 
cry,  though  we  know  it  is  well  and  easy  with  uncle 
and  papa,  and  only  our  part  hurts.  Mother  tells 
how  gently  he  looked  on  all  who  looked  at  him  — 
how  he  held  his  bouquet  sweet,  as  he  were  a  guest 


i864]  TO   THE  MISSES  2$ I 

in  a  friend's  parlor  and  must  still  do  honor.  The 
meek,  mild  gentleman  who  thought  no  harm,  but 
peace  toward  all. 

Vinnie  intended  to  go,  but  the  day  was  cold,  and 

she  wanted  to  keep  Uncle  L as  she  talked  with 

him,  always,  instead  of  this  new  way.  She  thought 
too,  for  the  crowd,  she  could  not  see  you,  children, 
and  she  would  be  another  one  to  give  others  care. 

Mother  said  Mr  V ,  yes,  dears,  even  Mr  V ^ 

at  whom  we  sometimes  smile,  talked  about  '  Lorin* 
and  Laviny '  and  his  friendship  towards  them,  to  your 
father's  guests.  We  won't  smile  at  him  any  more 
now,  will  we  ?  Perhaps  he  '11  live  to  tell  some  gen- 
tleness of  us,  who  made  merry  of  him. 

But  never  mind  that  now.  When  you  have 
strength,  tell  us  how  it  is,  and  what  we  may  do  for 
you,  of  comfort,  or  of  service.  Be  sure  you  crowd 
all  others  out,  precious  little  cousins.  Good- night. 
Let  Emily  sing  for  you  because  she  cannot  pray :  — 

It  is  not  dying  hurts  us  so, —  \ 

*T  is  living  hurts  us  more ; 

But  dying  is  a  different  way, 

A  kind,  behind  the  door,  — 

The  southern  custom  of  the  bird 

That  soon  as  frosts  are  due 

Adopts  a  better  latitude. 

We  are  the  birds  that  stay, 

The  shiverers  round  farmers'  doors, ' 

For  whose  reluctant  crumb 

We  stipulate,  till  pitying  snows 

Persuade  our  feathers  home.  ' 

Emily. 


252  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1864 

[1864.] 

So  many  ask  for  the  children  that  I  must  make 
a  separate  letter  to  tell  them  what  they  say,  and 
leave  my  kisses  till  next  time. 

Eliza  wrote  last  week,  faint  note  in  pencil  — 
dressed  in  blankets,  and  propped  up,  having  been 
so  sick  —  and  yet  too  weak  to  talk  much,  even  with 
her  slate.  She  said  this  of  you,  I  give  it  in  her  own 
word,  '  Make  them  know  I  love  them,*  and  added, 
should  have  written  immediately  herself,  except  for 
weakness. 

Mr  Dwight  asks  for  you  in  the  phrase  *  Of  your 
sweet  cousins.'  He  does  not  yet  know  papa  is 
asleep  —  only  very  weary. 

The  milliner  at  the  head  of  the  street  wipes  her 

eye  for  F and  L ,  and  a  tear  rumples  her 

ribbons.  Mr  and  Mrs  Sweetser  care  —  Mrs  Sweetser 
most  tenderly. 

.  .  .  Even  Dick's  wife,  simple  dame,  with  a 
kitchen  full,  and  the  grave  besides,  of  little  ragged 
ones,  wants  to  know  '  more  about  *  you,  and  follows 
mother  to  the  door,  who  has  called  with  bundle. 

Dick  says,  in  his  wise  way,  he  *  shall  always  be 
interested  in  them  young  ladies.*  One  little  young 
lady  of  his  own,  you  know,  is  in  Paradise.  That 
makes  him  tenderer-minded. 

Be  sure  you  don't  dOubt  about  the  sparrow. 

Poor and  ,  in  their  genteel,  antique 

way,  express  their  sympathy,  mixing  admiring  anec- 


1865]  TO   THE  MISSES  253 

dotes  of  your  father  and  mother's  youth,  when  they, 
God  help  them,  were  not  so  sere.  Besides  these* 
others,  children,  shall  we  tell  them  who  else  cherishes, 
every  day  the  same,  the  bright  one  and  the  black 
one  too?     Could  it  be  Emily? 

Would  it  interest  the  children  to  know  that  cro- 
cuses come  up,  in  the  garden  off  the  dining-room, 
and  a  fuchsia,  that  pussy  partook,  mistaking  it  for 
strawberries?  And  that  we  have  primroses,  like  the 
little  pattern  sent  in  last  winter's  note,  and  helio- 
trope by  the  aprons  full  —  the  mountain  colored  one 
—  and  a  jasmine  bud,  you  know  the  little  odor  like 
Lubin  —  and  gilliflowers,  magenta,  and  few  mignon- 
ette, and  sweet  alyssum  bountiful,  and  carnation  buds  ? 

Will  it  please  them  to  know  that  the  ice-house  is 
filled,  to  make  their  tumblers  cool  next  summer, 
and  once  in  a  while  a  cream? 

And  that  father  has  built  a  new  road  round  the 

pile  of  trees  between  our  house  and  Mr  S 's, 

where  they  can  take  the  soldier's  shirt  to  make,  or  a 
sweet  poem,  and  no  man  find  them  but  the  fly,  and 
he  such  a  little  man  ? 

Love,  dears,  from  us  all,  and  won't  you  tell  us 
how  you  are? 

We  seem  to  hear  so  little.  Emily. 

[January,  1865.] 

...  I  am  glad  my  little  girl  is  at  peace.  Peace 
is  a  deep  place.  Some,  too  faint  to  push,  are  assisted 
by  angels. 


254  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1865 

I  have  more  to  say  to  you  all  than  March  has  to 
the  maples,  but  then  I  cannot  write  in  bed.  I  read 
a  few  words  since  I  came  home  —  John  Talbot's 
parting  with  his  son,  and  Margaret's  with  Suffolk. 
I  read  them  in  the  garret,  and  the  rafters  wept. 

Remember  me  to  your  company,  their  Bedouin 
guest. 

Every  day  in  the  desert,  Ishmael  counts  his 
tents.     New  heart  makes  new  health,  dear. 

Happiness  is  haleness.  I  dreamed  last  night  I 
heard  bees  fight  for  pond- lily  stamens,  and  waked 
with  a  fly  in  ray  room. 

Shall  you  be  strong  enough  to  lift  me  by  the  first 
of  April  ?  I  won't  be  half  as  heavy  as  I  was  before. 
I  will  be  good  and  chase  my  spools. 

I  shall  think  of  my  little  Eve  going  away  fix&gt;m 

Eden.     Bring  me  a  jacinth  for  every  finger,  and  an 

onyx  shoe.  Emily. 

[1865.] 

Dear  Sister,  —  Brother  has  visited,  and  the  night 
is  falling,  so  I  must  close  with  a  little  hymn. 

I  had  hoped  to  express  more.  Love  more  I  never 
can,  sweet  D or  yourself. 

This  was  in  the  white  of  the  year. 
That  was  in  the  green. 
Drifts  were  as  difficult  then  to  think. 
As  daisies  now  to  be  seen. 
Looking  back  is  best  that  is  left. 
Or  if  it  be  before, 
Retrospection  is  prospect's  half, 
Sometimes  almost  more. 

Emily. 


i86s]  TO  THE  MISSES  255 

[February,  1865.] 

All  that  my  eyes  will  let  me  shall  be  said  for 
L ,  dear  little  solid  gold  girl.     I  am  glad  to  the 


foot  of  my  heart  that  you  will  go  to  M .     It 

will  make  you  warm.  Touches  *from  home/  tell 
Gungl,  are  better  than  '  sounds.  *  ^ 

You  persuade  me  to  speak  of  my  eyes,  which  I 
shunned  doing,  because  I  wanted  you  to  rest.  I 
could  not  bear  a  single  sigh  should  tarnish  your  vaca- 
tion, but,  lest  through  me  one  bird  delay  a  change  of 
latitude,  I  will  tell  you,  dear. 

The  eyes  are  as  with  you,  sometimes  easy,  some- 
times sad.  I  think  they  are  not  worse,  nor  do  I 
think  them  better  than  when  I  came  home. 

The  snow-light  offends  them,  and  the  house  is 
bright ;  notwithstanding,  they  hope  some.  For  the 
first  few  weeks  I  did  nothing  but  comfort  my  plants, 
till  now  their  small  green  cheeks  are  covered  with 
smiles.  I  chop  the  chicken  centres  when  we  have 
roast  fowl,  frequent  now,  for  the  hens  contend  and 
the  Cain  is  slain.  .  .  .  Then  I  make  the  yellow 
to  the  pies,  and  bang  the  spice  for  cake,  and  knit 
the  soles  to  the  stockings  I  knit  the  bodies  to  last 
June.  They  say  I  am  a  '  help.*  Partly  because  it  is 
true,  I  suppose,  and  the  rest  applause.  Mother  and 
Margaret  are  so  kind,  father  as  gentle  as  he  knows 
how^  and  Vinnie  good  to  me,  but  '  cannot  see  why 
I  don*t  get  well.*     This  makes  me  think  I  am  long 

^  Referring  to  an  old  piece  of  piano-forte  music. 


256  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1866 

sick,  and  this  takes  the  ache  to  my  eyes.  I  shall 
try  to  stay  with  them  a  few  weeks  more  before 
going  to  Boston,  though  what  it  would  be  to  see 
you  and  have  the  doctor's  care  —  that  cannot  be 

told.     You  will  not  wait  for  me.    Go  to  M now. 

I  wish  I  were  there,  myself,  to  start  your  little  feet 
'  lest  they  seem  to  come  short  of  it.*  I  have  so  much 
to  tell  I  can  tell  nothing,  except  a  sand  of  love. 
When  I  dare  I  shall  ask  if  I  may  go,  but  that  will 
not  be  now. 

Give  my  love  to  my  lamp  and  spoon,  and  the 
small  lantana.     Kindest  remembrance   for   all    the 

house,  and  write  next  from  M .     Go,  little  girl, 

to  M .  Life  is  so  fast  it  will  run  away,  notwith- 
standing our  sweetest  whoa. 

Already  they  love  you.  Be  but  the  maid  you  are 
to  me,  and  they  will  love  you  more. 

Carry  your  heart   and   your   curls,  and   nothing 

more  but  your  fingers.    Mr  D will  ask  for  these 

every  candle-light.  How  I  miss  ten  robins  that 
never  flew  from  the  rosewood  nest ! 

Dear   L , — This  is   my  letter  —  an  ill  and 

peevish  thing,  but  when  my  eyes  get  well  I  '11  send 
you  thoughts  like  daisies,  and  sentences  could  hold 
the  bees.  .  .  . 

[1866.] 

.  .  .  Oh,    L ,   why  were   the   children   sent 

too  faint  to  stand  alone  ?  .  .  .  Every  hour  is  anxious 
now,  and  heaven  protect  the  lamb  who  shared  her 
''-^ce  with  a  timider,  even  Emily. 


i868]  TO   THE  MISSES  2$/ 


[1868.] 

Dear  Children, — The  little  notes  shall  go  as 
fast  as  steam  can  take  them. 

Our  hearts  already  went.  Would  we  could  mail 
our  faces  for  your  dear  encouragement. 

Remember 

The  longest  day  that  God  appoints 
Will  finish  with  the  sun. 
Anguish  can  travel  to  its  stake, 
And  then  it  must  return. 

I  am  in  bed  to-day  —  a  curious  place  for  me,  and 

cannot  write  as  well  as  if  I  was  firmer,  but  love  as 

well,  and  long  more.   Tell  us  all  the  load.  Amherst's 

little  basket  is  never  so  full  but  it  holds  more.    That 's 

a  basket's  cause.     Not  a  flake  assaults  my  birds  but 

it  freezes  me.     Comfort,  little  creatures  —  whatever 

befall  us,  this  world  is  but  this  world.    Think  of  that 

great  courageous  place  we  have  never  seen  ! 

Write  at  once,  please,  I  am  so  full  of  grief  and 

surprise   and   physical  weakness.     I    cannot   speak 

until  I  know. 

Lovingly,  Emily. 

Of  this  letter  her  cousin  writes,  *AI1  this 
trouble  has  become  only  a  myth  now ;  it  must 
have  been  some  illness,  or  other  forgotten 
calamity.' 


258  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1869 

[Autamn,  1869.] 

Vinnie  was  '  gone  '  indeed  and  is  due  to-day,  and 
before  the  tumult  that  even  the  best  bring  we  will 
take  hold  of  hands.     It  was  sweet  and  antique  as 

birds  to  hear  L 's  voice,  worth  the  lying  awake 

from  ^VQ  o'clock  summer  mornings  to  hear.  I 
rejoice  that  my  wren  can  rise  and  touch  the  sky 
again.     We  all  have  moments  with  the  dust,  but 

the  dew  is  given.     Do  you  wish  you  heard  '  A 

talk '  ?  Then  I  would  you  did,  for  then  you  would 
be  here  always,  a  sweet  premium.  Would  you  like 
to  '  step  in  the  kitchen  '  ?    Then  you  shall  by  faith, 

which  is  the  first  sight.     Mr  C is  not   in  the 

tree,  because  the  rooks  won*t  let  him,  but  I  ate  a 
pear  as  pink  as  a  plum  that  he  made  last  spring, 
when  he  was  ogling  you.  Mother  has  on  the  petti- 
coat you  so  gallantly  gathered  while  he  sighed  and 
grafted. 

Tabby  is  eating  a  stone  dinner  from  a  stone  plate, 
.  .  .  Tim  is  washing  Dick's  feet,  and  talking  to  him 
now  and  then  in  an  intimate  way.  Poor  fellow,  how 
he  warmed  when  I  gave  him  your  message !  The 
red  reached  clear  to  his  beard,  he  was  so  gratified ; 
and  Maggie  stood  as  still  for  hers  as  a  puss  for  pat- 
ting. The  hearts  of  these  poor  people  lie  so  uncon- 
cealed you  bare  them  with  a  smile. 

Thank  you  for  recollecting  my  weakness.  I  am 
not  so  well  as  to  forget  I  was  ever  ill,  but  better 
and  working.  I  suppose  we  must  all  'ail  tiD 
evening.' 


iSyol  TO   THE  MISSES  259 

Read  Mr  Loweirs  Winter,  One  does  not  often 
meet  anything  so  perfect. 

In  many  little   comers   how  much  of  L I 

have. 

Maggie  'dragged'  the  garden  for  this  bud  for 
you.  You  have  heard  of  the  *  last  rose  of  summer.' 
This  is  that  rose's  son. 

Into  the  little  port  you  cannot  sail  unwelcome  at 

any  hour  of  day  or  night.     Love  for  F ,  and 

stay  close  to  Emily. 

[Spring,  1870.] 

Dear  Children,  —  I  think  the  bluebirds  do  their 
work  exactly  like  me.  They  dart  around  just  so, 
with  little  dodging  feet,  and  look  so  agitated.  I 
really  feel  for  them,  they  seem  to  be  so  tried. 

The  mud  is  very  deep  —  up  to  the  wagons' 
stomachs  —  arbutus  making  pink  clothes,  and  every- 
thing alive. 

Even  the  hens  are  touched  with  the  things  of 
Bourbon,  and  make  republicans  like  me  feel  strangely 
out  of  scene. 

Mother  went  rambling,  and  came  in  with  a  bur- 
dock on  her  shawl,  so  we  know  that  the  snow  has 
perished  from  the  earth.     Noah  would  have  liked 
,  mother. 

I  am  glad  you  are  with  Eliza.  It  is  next  to  shade 
to  know  that  those  we  love  are  cool  on  a  parched 
day. 

Bring  my  love  to and  Mr .     You  will 


260  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1870 

not  need  a  hod.     C writes  often,   full  of  joy 

and  liberty.     I  guess  it  is  a  case  of  peace.  .  .  . 
y^        Pussy  has  a  daughter  in  the  shavings  barrel. 

Father  steps  like  Cromwell  when   he   gets   the 
/       kindlings. 

Mrs gets  bigger,  and  rolls  down  the  lane  to 

church   like  a   reverend   marble.      Did  you  know 
little  Mrs  Holland  was  in  Berlin  for  her  eyes?  .  .  . 

Did  you  know  about  Mrs  J ?    She  fledged 

her  antique  wings.     'T  is  said  that  *  nothing  in  her 
life  became  her  like  the  leaving  it.* 

*  Great  streets  of  silence  led  away,'  etc.  * 

Emily. 

[May] 

This  little  sheet  of  paper  has  lain  for  several  years 
in  my  Shakespeare,  and  though  it  is  blotted  and 
antiquated  is  endeared  by  its  resting-place. 

I  always  think  of  you  peculiarly  in  May,  as  it  is 
the  peculiar  anniversary  of  your  loving  kindness  to 
me,  though  you  have  always  been  dear  cousins,  and 
blessed  me  all  you  could. 

I  cooked  the  peaches  as  you  told  me,  and  they 
swelled  to  beautiful  fleshy  halves  and  tasted  quite 
magic.  The  beans  we  fricasseed  and  they  made  a 
savory  cream  in  cooking  that  *  Aunt  Emily '  liked  to 
sip.  She  was  always  fonder  of  julep  food  than  of 
more  substantial.  Your  remembrance  of  her  is  very 
sweetly  touching. 

^  Second  Series,  page  225. 


rSro7  TO  THE  MISSES 26l 

IVIaggie  is  ironing,  and  a  cotton  and  linen  and 
rofSe  heat  makes  the  possj's  cheeks  red.  It  b 
lonely  withont  the  birds  to-day,  for  it  rains  badly; 
and  the  fitde  poets  hare  no  ombrellas.  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Fly  firom  Elmily's  window  for  L .  Botan- 
ical name  unknown. 

[flnclodng  a  pressed  insect.] 

[September,  iSjo-J 

Little  Sisters,  —  I  wish  yon  were  with  me,  not 
precisely  here,  bat  in  those  sweet  mansions  the  mind 
likes  to  suppose.  Do  they  exist  or  nay?  We  believe 
they  may,  bat  do  they,  how  know  we  ?  *  The  light 
that  never  was  on  sea  or  land '  might  jnst  as  soon  be 
had  for  the  knocking. 

F 's  rustic  note  was  as  sweet  as  fern ;  L 's 

token  also  tenderly  estimated.     ]VIaggie  and  I  are 

fighting  which  shall  give  L the  *  plant,'  though 

it  is  quite   a  pleasant  war.  .  .  .  A went  this 

morning,  after  a  happy  egg  and  toast  provided  by 
Maggie,  whom  he  promised  to  leave  his  sole  heir. 

The  *  pussum '  is  found.  *  Two  dollars  reward ' 
would  return  John  Franklin.  .  .  . 

Love  for  Aunt  O .    Tell  her  I  think  to  instruct 

flowers  win  be  her  labor  in  heaven.  .  .  . 

Nearly  October,  sisters!      No  one  can  keep  a 

snmach  and  keep  a  secret  too.    That  was  my  '  pipe ' 

F found  in  the  woods. 

AfTectioQately, 

Modoc. 

vot.  n.  —  3 


262  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1870 

[1870.] 

Untiring  Little  Sisters,  —  What  will  I  ever  do 
for  you,  yet  have  done  the  most,  for  love  is  that  one 
perfect  labor  nought  can  supersede.  I  suppose  the 
pain  is  still  there,  for  pain  that  is  worthy  does  not  go 
so  soon.  The  small  can  crush  the  great,  however, 
only  temporarily.  In  a  few  days  we  examine,  muster 
our  forces,  and  cast  it  away.  Put  it  out  of  your 
hearts,  children.  Faith  is  too  fair  to  taint  it  so. 
There  are  those  in  the  morgue  that  bewitch  us  with 
sweetness,  but  that  which  is  dead  must  go  with  the 
ground.  There  is  a  verse  in  the  Bible  that  says 
there  are  those  who  shall  not  see  death.  I  suppose 
them  to  be  the  faithful.  Love  will  not  expire. 
There  was  never  the  instant  when  it  was  lifeless  in 
the  world,  though  the  quicker  deceit  dies,  the  better 
for  the  truth,  who  is  indeed  our  dear  friend. 

I  am  sure  you  will  gain,  even  from  this  wormwood. 
The  martyrs  may  not  choose  their  food. 

God  made  no  act  without  a  cause, 

Nor  heart  without  an  aim, 
Our  inference  is  premature. 

Our  premises  to  blame. 

.  .  .  Sweetest  of  Christmas  to  you  both,  and  a 
better  year.  EsfiLy. 

Dear  Children,  —  When  I  think  of  your  little 
faces  I  feel  as  the  band  does  before  it  makes  its  first 
shout.  .  .  .  EiOLV. 


1871]  TO   THE  MISSES  263 

[1870.] 

.  .  .  Mother  drives  with  Tim  to  carry  pears  to 
settlers.  Sugar  pears  with  hips  Uke  hams,  and  the 
flesh  of  bonbons.  Vinnie  fastens  flowers  from  the 
frosts.  .  .  . 

Lifetime  is  for  two,  never  for  committee. 

I  saw  your  Mrs  H .     She  looks  a  little  tart, 

but  Vinnie  says  makes  excellent  pies  after  one  gets 
acquainted. 

[Spring,  1871.] 

The  will  is  always  near,  dear,  though  the  feet 
vary.  The  terror  of  the  winter  has  made  a  little 
creature  of  me,  who  thought  myself  so  bold. 

Father  was  very  sick.  I  presumed  he  would  die, 
and  the  sight  of  his  lonesome  face  all  day  was 
harder  than  personal  trouble.  He  is  growing  better, 
though  physically  reluctantly.  I  hope  I  am  mistaken, 
but  I  think  his  physical  life  don*t  want  to  live  any 
longer.  You  know  he  never  played,  and  the 
straightest  engine  has  its  leaning  hour.  Vinnie  was 
not  here.  Now  we  will  turn  the  comer.  All  this 
while  I  was  with  you  all,  much  of  every  hour,  wish- 
ing we  were  near  enough  to  assist  each  other. 
Would  you  have  felt  more  at  home,  to  know  we 
were  both  in  extremity?  That  would  be  my  only 
regret  that  I  had  not  told  you. 

As  regards  the  *  pine  '  and  the  '  jay,'  it  is  a  long 
tryst,  but  I  think  they  are  able.  I  have  spoken  with 
them. 


264  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1871 

Of  the  *thom,'  dear,  give  it  to  me,  for  I  am 
strongest.  Never  cany  what  I  can  carry,  for  though 
I  think  I  bend,  something  straightens  me.  Go  to 
the  *  wine-press,'  dear,  and  come  back  and  say  has 
the  number  altered.  I  descry  but  one.  What  I 
would,  I  cannot  say  in  so  small  a  place. 

Interview  is  acres,  while  the  broadest  letter  feels 
a  bandaged  place.  .  .  . 

Tell  F we  hold  her  tight.     Tell  L love 

is  oldest  and  takes  care  of  us,  though  just  now  in  a 

piercing  place. 

Ebuly. 

[Written  to  Milwaukee,  just  after  the  Chicago  fire,  187 1.] 

We  have  the  little  note  and  are  in  part  relieved, 
but  have  been  too  alarmed  and  grieved  to  hush 
immediately.  The  heart  keeps  sobbing  in  its  sleep. 
It  is  the  speck  that  makes  the  cloud  that  wrecks  the 
vessel,  children,  yet  no  one  fears  a  speck.  I  hope 
what  is  not  lost  is  saved.  Were  any  angel  present, 
I  feel  it  could  not  be  allowed.  So  grateful  that  our 
little  girls  are  not  on  fire  too.  Amherst  would  have 
quenched  them.  Thank  you  for  comforting  innocent 
blamed  creatures.     We  are  trying,  too.    The  mayor 

of  Milwaukee  cuts  and  you  and  L sew,  don't  you? 

The  New  York  Times  said  so.  Sorrow  is  the  *  funds ' 
never  quite  spent,  always  a  little  left  to  be  loaned 
kindly.  We  have  a  new  cow.  I  wish  I  could  give 
Wisconsin  a  little  pail  of  milk.  Dick's  Maggie  is 
wilting.     Awkward   little   flower,   but   transplanting 


1872]  TO   THE  MISSES 265 

makes  it  fair.     How  are  the  long  days  that  made 

the  fresh  afraid? 

Brother  Emily. 

[March,  1872.] 

Thank  you,  own  little  girls,  for  the  sweet  remem- 
brance —  sweet  specifically.  Be  sure  it  was  pondered 
with  loving  thoughts  not  unmixed  with  palates. 

But  love,  Uke  literature,  is  'its  exceeding  great 
reward.*  ...  I  am  glad  you  heard  *  Little  Em*ly.'  I 
would  go  far  to  hear  her,  except  I  have  lost  the  run  of 
the  roads.  .  .  .  Infinite  March  is  here,  and  I  *  hered ' 
a  bluebird.     Of  course  I  am  standing  on  my  head ! 

Go  slow,  my  soul,  to  feed  th3^elf 

Upon  his  rare  approach. 

Go  rapid,  lest  competing  death 

Prevail  upon  the  coach. 

Go  timid,  should  his  testing  eye 

Determine  thee  amiss, 

Go  boldly,  for  thou  paidst  the  price. 

Redemption  for  a  kiss. 

Tabby   is  singing    Old  Hundred,  which,  by  the 

way,  is  her  maiden  name.     Would  they  address  and 

mail  the  note  to  their  friend  J W ? 

Tidings  of  a  book. 

Emily. 

[1872.] 

I  like  to  thank  you,  dear,  for  the  annual  candy. 
Though  you  make  no  answer,  I  have  no  letter  from 
the  dead,  yet  daily  love  them  more.     No  part  of 


266  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [187a 

mind  is  permanent.  This  startles  the  happy,  but  it 
assists  the  sad. 

This  is  a  mighty  morning.     I  trust  that  L is 

with  it,  on  hill  or  pond  or  wheel.  Too  few  the 
mornings  be,  too  scant  the  nights.  No  lodging  can 
be  had  for  the  delights  that  come  to  earth  to  stay, 

but  no  apartment  find  and  ride  away.     F was 

brave  and  dear,  and  helped  as  much  by  counsel  as 
by  actual  team.     Whether  we  missed  L  we  will 

let  her  guess  /riddles  are  healthful  food^ 

Eliza  was  not  with  us,  but  it  was  owing  to  the 
trains.     We  know  she  meant  to  come. 

Oh  !  Cruel  Paradise  !  We  have  a  chime  of  bells 
given  for  brave  Frazer.  You  '11  stop  and  hear  them, 
won't  you? 

*  We  conquered,  but  Bozzaris  fell.'  That  sentence 
always  chokes  me.  Emily. 

The  new  College  church  was  given  in  1870 
by  Mr  William  French  Stearns,  brother  of  the 
Frazer  so  mourned  ;  and  its  chime  of  bells  was 
a  memorial  ^  to  the  Amherst  students  who  were 

^  Following  is  the  inscription  on  the  fundamental  bell :  — 

THESE    BELLS    ARE    PLACED    HERB    BY 

GEORGE   HOWE  OF  BOSTON  AND  ARB 

TO  BE  MADE  TO  CHIME  ON  ALL  SUITABLE 

OCCASIONS  IN  COMMEMORATION  OF  TUB 

BRAVE   PATRIOTS  CONNECTED  WFTH 

AMHERST  COLLEGE  WHO  LOST  THBIR 

LIVES  IN  THE  WAR  AGAINST  THB 

GREAT  REBELLION  OF  1861 


1872]  TO   THE  MISSES  267 

killed  in  the  war.  A  cannon,  now  in  WiUiston 
Hall,  Amherst  College,  was  given  by  General 
Burnside  at  the  request  of  Colonel  Clark,  in 
loving  memory  of  Frazer  Stearns,  the  first  of 
all  the  Amherst  students  who  enlisted,  nearly 
two  hundred  and  fifty  in  number. 

An  ill  heart,  like  a  body,  has  its  more  com- 
fortable days,  and  then  its  days  of  pain,  its  long 
relapse,  when  rallying  requires  more  effort  than  to 
dissolve  life,  and  death  looks  choiceless. 

Of  Miss  P 1  know  but  this,  dear.     She  wrote 

me  in  October,  requesting  me  to  aid  the  world  by 
my  chirrup  more.  Perhaps  she  stated  it  as  my 
duty,  I  don't  distinctly  remember,  and  always  bum 
such  letters,  so  I  cannot  obtain  it  now.  I  replied 
declining.  She  did  not  write  to  me  again  —  she 
might  have  been  offended,  or  perhaps  is  extricating 
humanity  from  some  hopeless  ditch.  .  .  . 

Emily  was  often  besieged  by  different  per- 
sons, literary  and  otherwise,  to  benefit  the  world 
by  her  *  chirrup,'  but  she  steadily  refused  to 
publish  during  her  lifetime.  In  all  these  years 
she  was  constantly  writing  verses  ;  and  while, 
as  already  apparent,  she  frequently  enclosed 
poems  in  letters  to  friends,  the  fact  that  scores 
in  addition  were  being  written  every  year  was 
her  own  secret.  Her  literary  methods  were  also 
her  own,  —  she  must  frequently  have  tossed 


/ 


268  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  (187J 

off,  many  times  daily,  the  stray  thoughts  which 
came  to  her.  The  box  of  '  scraps '  found  by 
her  sister  after  her  death  proves  this  conclu- 
sively, as  some  of  Emily's  rarest  flashes  were 
caught  upon  the  margins  of  newspapers,  backs 
of  envelopes,  or  whatever  bit  of  paper  was 
nearest  at  hand,  in  the  midst  of  other  occu- 
pations. In  the  more  carefully  copied  poems 
are  many  alterations,  but  it  is  a  curious  fact 
that  not  one  change  has  reference  to  im- 
provement in  rhyme  or  rhythm.  Every  sug- 
gestion for  a  different  word  or  phrase  was  in 
the  evident  hope  that  by  some  one  of  them 
the  thought  might  be  made  clearer,  and  not  in 
a  single  instance  merely  to  smooth  the  form. 

Whether  Emily  Dickinson  had  any  idea  that 
her  work  would  ever  be  published  cannot  be 
known.  Except  when  a  friend  occasionally 
*  turned  love  to  larceny '  as  some  one  has  aptly 
said,  nothing  was  printed  before  her  death. 
One  of  the  poems,  indeed,  begins,  — 

Publication  is  the  auction 
Of  the  mind  of  man. 

But  the  Prelude  to  the  Poems,  First  Series, 
almost  seems  to  indicate  the  thought  of  a  pos- 
sible future  public,  when  she  herself  should 
be  beyond  the  reach  of  the  praise  or  criticism 
which  her  writing  might  call  forth. 


1872]  TO   THE  MISSES  269 


[Early  Summer,  1872.] 

Dear  Children,  —  We  received  the  news  of  your 

loving  kindness  through  Uncle  J last  evening, 

and  Vinnie  is  negotiating  with  neighbor  Gray,  who 
goes  to  a  wedding  in  Boston  next  week,  for  the 
procuring  of  the  nest.  Vinnie 's  views  of  express- 
age  do  not  abate  with  time.     The  crocuses  are  with 

us  and  several  other  colored  friends.    Cousin  H 

broke  her  hip,  and  is  in  a  polite  bed,  surrounded  by 
mint  juleps.  I  think  she  will  hate  to  leave  it  as  badly 
as  Marian  Erie  did.  Vinnie  says  there  is  a  tree  in 
Mr  Sweetser's  woods  that  shivers.  I  am  afraid  it  is 
cold.  I  am  going  to  make  it  a  little  coat.  .  I  must 
make  several,  because  it  is  tall  as  the  barn,  and  put 
them  on  as  the  circus  men  stand  on  each  other's 
shoulders.  .  .  .  There  is  to  be  a  '  show  '  next  week, 
and  little  Maggie's  bed  is  to  be  moved  to  the  door 
so  she  can  see  the  tents.  Folding  her  own  like 
the  Arabs  gives  her  no  apprehension.  While  I 
write,  dear  children,  the  colors  Eliza  loved  quiver 
on  the  pastures,  and  day  goes  gay  to  the  northwest, 
innocent  as  she.  Emily. 

.  .  .  Thank  you  for  the  passage.  How  long  to 
live  the  truth  is  I  A  word  is  dead  when  it  is  said, 
some  say.     I  say  it  just  begins  to  live  that  day. 

[July  27, 1872.] 
Little   Irish   Maggie    went  to   sleep   this  morn- 
ing at  six  o'clock,  just  the  time  grandpa  rises,  and 


270  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  £1873 


will  rest  in  the  grass  at  Northampton  to-morrow. 
She  has  had  a  hard  sickness,  but  her  awkward  little 
life  is  saved  and  gallant  now.  Our  Maggie  is  help- 
ing her  mother  put  her  in  the  cradle.  .  .  , 

Month  afr  r  this  —  after  that  is  October,  isn't  it? 
That  is  n't  much  long.  Joy  to  enfold  our  little  girls 
in  so  close  a  future.     That  was  a  lovely  letter  of 

F 's.     It  put  the  cat  to  playing  and  the  kettle 

to  purring,  and  two  or  three  birds  in  plush  teams 
reined  nearer  to  the  window.  .  .  •  You  will  miss  the 
nasturtiums,  but  you  will  meet  the  chestnuts.  You 
also  will  miss  the  south  wind,  but  I  will  save  the 

Of  course  we  shall  have  a  telegram  that  you  have 
left  for  Nebraska.  .  .  .  Emily. 

.  .  .  J is  coming  to  put  away  her  black  hair 

on  the  children's  pillow.  I  hoped  she  'd  come  while 
you  were  here,  to  help  me  with  the  starch,  but  Satan's 
ways  are  not  as  our  ways.  I  'm  straightening  all  the 
property,  and  making  things  erect  and  smart,  and 
to-morrow,  at  twilight,  her  little  heel  boots  will 
thump  into  Amherst.  It  being  summer  season  she 
will  omit  the  sleigh-bell  gown,  and  that 's  a  palliative. 
Vinnie  is  all  disgust,  and  I  shall  have  to  smirk  fior 
two  to  make  the  manners  even. 

[1872,  or  1873.] 

Thank  you,  dear,  for  the  love.  I  am  progressing 
timidly. 


1873]  TO  THE  MISSES 27 1 

Experiment    has  a  stimulus    which    withers    its 

fear. 

This  is  the  place  they  hoped  before, 

Where  I  am  hoping  now. 

The  seed  of  disappointment  gre^f?^: 

Within  a  capsule  gay, 

Too  distant  to  arrest  the  feet 

That  walk  this  plank  of  balm  — 

Before  them  lies  escapeless  sea  —  - 

The  way  is  closed  they  came. 

Since  you  so  gently  ask,  I  have  had  but  one 
serious  adventure  —  getting  a  nail  in  my  foot,  but 
Maggie  pulled  it  out.  It  only  kept  me  awake  one 
night,  and  the  birds  insisted  on  sitting  up,  so  it 
became  an  occasion  instead  of  a  misfortune.  There 
was  a  circus,  too,  and  I  watched  it  away  at  half-past 
three  that  morning.  They  said  *  hoy,  hoy  *  to  their 
horses. 

Glad  you  heard  Rubinstein.    Grieved  L could 

not  hear  him.  He  makes  me  think  of  polar  nights 
Captain  Hall  could  tell  I  Going  from  ice  to  ice ! 
What  an  exchange  of  awe  ! 

I  am  troubled  for  L 's  eye.     Poor  little  girl  1 

Can  I  help  her?  She  has  so  many  times  saved 
me.  Do  take  her  to  Arlington  Street.*  Xerxes  must 
go  now  and  see  to  her  worlds.  You  shall  *  taste,' 
dear.  Lovingly. 

^  To  the  physician  who  had  already  done  so  much  for 
Emily's  eyes. 


272  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1873 

[Winter,  1873.] 

...  I  know  I  love  my  friends  —  I  feel  it  far  in 
here  where  neither  blue  nor  black  eye  goes,  and 
fingers  cannot  reach.  I  know  'tis  love  for  them 
that  sets  the  blister  in  my  throat,  many  a  time  a 
day,  when  winds  go  sweeter  than  their  wont,  or  a 
different  cloud  puts  my  brain  from  home. 

I  cannot  see  my  soul,  but  know 't  is  there. 
Nor  ever  saw  his  house  nor  furniture. 
Who  has  invited  me  with  him  to  dwell ; 
But  a  confiding  guest  consult  as  well, 
What  raiment  honor  him  the  most, 
That  I  be  adequately  dressed. 
For  he  insures  to  none 
Lest  men  specifical  adorn 
Procuring  him  perpetual  drest 
13y  dating  it  a  sudden  feast. 

Lx)ve  for  the  glad  if  you  know  them,  for  the  sad 
if  they  know  you. 

[March,  1873.] 

...  I  open  my  window,  and  it  fills  the 
chamber  with  white  dirt.  I  think  God  must  be 
dusting ;  and  the  wind  blows  so  I  expect  to  read  in 
The  Republican  'Cautionary  signals  for  Amherst,' 
or,  *  No  ships  ventured  out  from  Phoenix  Row.'  .  .  . 
Life  is  so  rotatory  that  the  wilderness  falls  to  each, 
sometime.     It  is  safe  to  remember  that.  .  .  . 


i873]  TO   THE  MISSES  273 

[Autumn,  1873.] 

...  I  think  of  your  little  parlor  as  the  poets 
once  thought  of  Windermere,  —  peace,  sunshine, 
and  books. 

There  is  no  frigate  like  a  book 

To  take  us  lands  away, 

Nor  any  coursers  like  a  page 

Of  prancing  poetry. 

This  traverse  may  the  poorest  take, 

Without  oppress  of  toll ; 

How  frugal  is  the  chariot 

That  bears  the  human  soul ! 

What  words  could  more  vividly  express 
the  uplift,  the  expansion,  the  wider  horizon 
which  books  bring!  To  Emily  Dickinson, 
they  were  always  solace  and  delight,  —  *  fri- 
gates'  and  'coursers'  indeed,  to  her  quiet  life, 
taking  her  over  the  world  and  into  the  infinite 
spaces,  bringing  Cathay  and  Brazil,  Cashmere 
and  Teneriffe,  into  an  intimacy  as  near  and 
familiar  as  the  summer  bees  and  butterflies  of 
her  own  home  noon.  Without  the  help  of 
books  even,  her  nimble  fancy  leaped  interven- 
ing leagues  as  if  it  commanded  the  magic  car- 
pet of  Prince  Houssain;  but  her  love  for  books 
and  indebtedness  to  them  are  many  times  ex- 
pressed in  the  poems,  both  published  and 
unpublished. 


274  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1873 

[Autumn,  1873.] 

Dear  Berkeleys,  —  I  should  feel  it  my  duty  to 
lay  my  &lt;  net '  on  the  national  altar,  would  it  appease 
finance,  but  as  Jay  Cooke  can't  wear  it,  I  suppose  it 

won't.    I  believe  he  opened  the  scare.     M says 

D pulled  her  hair,  and  D says  M pulled 

her  hair,  but  the  issue  at  court  will  be,  which  puUed 
the  preliminary  hair.  I  am  not  yet '  thrown  out  of 
employment,*  nor  ever  receiving  'wages'  find  them 
materially  *  reduced,*  though  when  bread  may  be  a 
'  tradition  *  Mr  C alone  knows.  I  am  deeply  in- 
debted   to    F ,   also   to  her  sweet   sister  Mrs 

Ladislaw  ;  add  the  funds  to  the  funds,  please.  Keep 
the  cap  till  I  send  —  I  could  not  insult  my  country  by 
incurring  expressage  now.  .  .  .  Buff  sings  like  a  nan- 
keen bumble-bee,  and  a  bird*s  nest  on  the  S3rringa  is 
just  in  a  line  with  the  conservatory  fence,  so  I  have 
fitted  a  geranium  to  it  and  the  effect  is  deceitful. 

I  see  by  the  paper  that  father  spends  the  winter 
with  you.     Will  you  be  glad  to  see  him  ?  .  .  .  Tell 

L when  I  was  a  baby  father  used  to  take  me  to 

mill  for  my  health.  I  was  then  in  consumption ! 
While  he  obtained  the  *  grist,*  the  horse  looked  round 
at  me,  as  if  to  say  * "  eye  hath  not  seen  nor  ear  heard 
&gt;  the  things  that  **  I  would  do  to  you  if  I  were  n't 
tied !  *     That  is  the  way  I  feel  toward  her.  .  .  . 

Maggie  will  write  soon,  says  it  was  Mount  Hol- 
yoke,  and  not  sweet-brier  she  gave  you !  Thanks  for 
the  litde  '  news.*    Did  get  F *s  note  and  thank  it 


i8743  ^^   ^^^  MISSES  27s 

Have  thousands  of  things  to  say  as  also  ten  thou- 
sands, but  must  abate  now. 

Lovmgly, 

Emily. 

[1874.] 

Dear  Children,  —  Father  is  ill  at  home.  I  think 
it  is  the  '  Legislature  *  reacting  on  an  otherwise 
obliging  constitution.  Maggie  is  ill  at  Tom's  —  a 
combination  of  cold  and  superstition  of  fever  —  of 
which  her  enemy  is  ill  —  and  longing  for  the  prom- 
ised land,  of  which  there  is  no  surplus.  *  Apollyon  ' 
and  the  *  Devil  *  fade  in  martial  lustre  beside  Lavinia 
and  myself.  *As  thy  day  is  so  shall  thy*  stem  'be.* 
We  can  all  of  us  sympathize  with  the  man  who 
wanted  the  roan  horse  to  ride  to  execution,  because 
he  said  *twas  a  nimble  hue,  and  'twould  be  over 
sooner.  .  .  . 

Dear  L ,  shall  I  enclose  the  slips,  or  delay  till 

father?  Vinnie  advises  the  latter.  I  usually  prefer 
formers,  latters  seeming  to  me  like  Dickens's  hero's 
dead  mamma,  *too  some  weeks  off*  to  risk.  Do 
you  remember  the  '  sometimes '  of  childhood,  which 
invariably  never  occurred  ?  .  .  . 

Be  pleased  you  have  no  cat  to  detain  from  justice. 
Ours  have  taken  meats,  and  the  wife  of  the  'general 
court  *  is  trying  to  lay  them  out,  but  as  she  has  but 
two  wheels  and  they  have  four,  I  would  accept  their 
chances.  Kitties  eat  kindlings  now.  Vinnie  thinks 
they  are  'cribbers.'     I  wish  I  could  make  you  as 


276  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1S74 

long  a  call  as  De  Quincey  made  North,  but  that 
morning  cannot  be  advanced. 

ElOLY. 

[1874] 

...  I  was  sick,  little  sister,  and  write  you  the 
first  that  I  am  able. 

The  loveliest  sermon  I  ever  heard  was  the  disap- 
pointment of  Jesus  in  Judas.  It  was  told  like  a 
mortal  story  of  intimate  young  men.  I  suppose  no 
surprise  we  can  ever  have  will  be  so  sick  as  that. 
The  last  *  I  never  knew  you '  may  resemble  it.  I 
would  your  hearts  could  have  rested  from  the  first 
severity  before  you  received  this  other  one,  but  *  not 
as  I  will.*  I  suppose  the  wild  flowers  encourage 
themselves  in  the  dim  woods,  and  the  bird  that  is 
bruised  limps  to  his  house  in  silence,  but  we  have 
human  natures,  and  these  are  different.     It  is  lovely 

that  Mrs  W did  not  disappoint  you ;  not  that  I 

thought  it  possible,  but  you  were  so  much  grieved. 
...  A  finite  life,  little  sister,  is  that  peculiar  garment 
that  were  it  optional  with  us  we  might  decline  to 
wear.     Tender  words  to  L ,  not  most,  I  trust,  in 

need  of  them. 

Lovingly,  Emily. 

.  .  .  How  short  it  takes  to  go,  dear,  but  afterward 
to  come  so  many  weary  years  —  and  yet  't  is  done 
as  cool  as  a  general  trifle.  Affection  is  like  bread, 
unnoticed  till  we  starve,  and  then  we  dream  of  it, 
and  sing  of  it,  and  paint  it,  when  every  urchin  in 


1874]  TO  THE  MISSES  2/7 

the  Street  has  more  than  he  can  eat.     We  turn  not 
older  with  years,  but  newer  every  day. 

Of  all  these  things  we  tried  to  talk,  but  the  time 
refused  us.  Longing,  it  may  be,  is  the  gift  no  other 
gift  supplies.  Do  you  remember  what  you  said  the 
night  you  came  to  me?  I  secure  that  sentence. 
If  I  should  see  your  face  no  more  it  will  be  your 
portrait,  and  if  I  should,  more  vivid  than  your 
mortal  face.  We  must  be  careful  what  we  say. 
No  bird  resumes  its  ^gg, 

A  word  left  careless  on  a  page 
May  consecrate  an  eye, 
When  folded  in  perpetual  seam 
The  wrinkled  author  lie. 

Emily. 

...  A  tone  from  the  old  bells,  perhaps,  might 
wake  the  children. 

We  send  the  wave  to  find  the  wave. 

An  errand  so  divine 

The  messenger  enamored  too, 

Forgetting  to  return. 

We  make  the  sage  decision  still 

Soever  made  in  vain, 

The  only  time  to  dam  the  sea 

Is  when  the  sea  is  gone. 

Emily,  with  love. 

[Spring,  1874.] 

Sisters,  —  I  hear  robins  a  great  way  off,  and 
wagons  a  great  way  off,  and  rivers  a  great  way  off, 

VOL.  IL — 4 


278  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1874 

and  all  appear  to  be  hurrying  somewhere  undis- 
closed to  me.  Remoteness  is  the  founder  of  sweet- 
ness j  could  we  see  all  we  hope,  or  hear  the  whole 
we  fear  told  tranquil,  like  another  tale,  there  would 
be  madness  near.  Each  of  us  gives  or  takes  heaven 
in  corporeal  person,  for  each  of  us  has  the  skill  of 
life.  I  am  pleased  by  your  sweet  acquaintance.  It 
is  not  recorded  of  any  rose  that  it  failed  of  its  bee, 
though  obtained  in  specific  instances  through  scarlet 
experience.  The  career  of  flowers  differs  from  ours 
only  in  inaudibleness.  I  feel  more  reverence  as  I 
grow  for  these  mute  creatures  whose  suspense  or 
transport  may  surpass  my  own.  Pussy  remembered 
the  judgment,  and  remained  with  Vinnie.  Maggie 
preferred  her  home  to  'Miggles*  and  'Oakhursty' 
so  with  a  few  spring  touches^  nature  remains 
unchanged. 

The  most  triumphant  bird 

I  ever  knew  or  met, 

Embarked  upon  a  twig  to-day,  — 

And  till  dominion  set 

I  perish  to  behold 

So  competent  a  sight  — 

And  sang  for  nothing  scrutable 

But  impudent  delight. 

Retired  and  resumed 

His  transitive  estate ; 

To  what  delicious  accident 

Does  finest  glory  fit  I 

Emily 


1874]  TO   THE  MISSES  279 

.  .  .  There  is  that  which  is  called  an  '  awakening  * 
in  the  church,  and  I  know  of  no  choicer  ecstasy  than 

to  see  Mrs roll  out  in  crape  every  morning,  I 

suppose  to  intimidate  antichrist;  at  least  it  would 
have  that  effect  on  me.  It  reminds  me  of  Don 
Quixote  demanding  the  surrender  of  the  wind-mill, 
and  of  Sir  Stephen  Toplift,  and  of  Sir  Alexander 
Cockbum. 

Spring  is  a  happiness  so  beautiful,  so  unique,  so 
unexpected,  that  I  don't  know  what  to  do  with  my 
heart.  I  dare  not  take  it,  I  dare  not  leave  it  — 
what  do  you  advise? 

Life  is  a  spell  so  exquisite  that  everything  con- 
spires to  break  it. 

'  What  do  I  think  of  Middlemarch  ? '  What  do 
I  think  of  glory  —  except  that  in  a  few  instances 
this  '  mortal  has  already  put  on  immortality.* 

George  EUot  is  one.  The  mysteries  of  human 
nature  surpass  the  '  mysteries  of  redemption,*  for  the 
infinite  we  only  suppose,  while  we  see  the  finite. 
...  I  launch  Vinnie  on  Wednesday ;  it  will  require 
the  combined  efforts  of  Maggie,  Providence  and 
myself,  for  whatever  advances  Vinnie  makes  in 
nature  and  art,  she  has  not  reduced  departure  to 
a  science.  .  .  . 

Your  loving  Emily. 

When,  in  June  of  1874,  Emily's  father  died 
suddenly  in  Boston,  —  taken  ill,  indeed,  while 
making  a  speech  in  the  Legislature,  and  dying 


V 


28o  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1874 

within  a  few  hours,  —  the  effect  upon  her  was 
as  if  the  foundations  of  her  world  had  given 
way.  She  gathered  herself  together  in  a 
measure,  and  after  a  few  days  wrote  to  her 
cousins :  — 

You  might  not  remember  me,  dears.  I  cannot  re- 
call myself.  I  thought  I  was  strongly  built^  but  this 
stronger  has  undermined  me. 

We  were  eating  our  supper  the  fifteenth  of  June, 
and  Austin  came  in.  He  had  a  despatch  in  his 
hand,  and  I  saw  by  his  face  we  were  all  lost,  though 
I  did  n*t  know  how.  He  said  that  father  was  very 
sick,  and  he  and  Vinnie  must  go.  The  train  had 
already  gone.  While  horses  were  dressing,  news 
came  he  was  dead. 

Father  does  not  live  with  us  now —  he  lives  in  a  new 
house.  Though  it  was  built  in  an  hour  it  is  better 
than  this.  He  has  n't  any  garden  because  he  moved 
after  gardens  were  made,  so  we  take  him  the  best 
flowers,  and  if  we  only  knew  he  knew,  perhaps  we 
could  stop  crying.  .  .  .  The  grass  begins  after  Pat 
has  stopped  it. 

I  cannot  write  any  more,  dears.  Though  it  is  many 
nights,  my  mind  never  comes  home.  Thank  yott 
each  for  the  love,  though  I  could  not  notice  it 
Almost  the  last  tune  that  he  heard  was, '  Rest  bom 
thy  loved  employ.* 

Emily. 


1875]  TO   THE  MISSES  28 1 


[April,  1875] 

I  have  only  a  buttercup  to  offer  for  the  centen- 
nial, as  an  '  embattled  farmer  *  has  but  little  time. 
Begging  you  not  to  smile  at  my  limited  meadows, 

I  am  modestly 

Yours. 


[Summer,  1875.] 

Dear  Children,  —  I  decide  to  give  you  one  more 
package  of  lemon  drops,  as  they  only  come  once  a 
year.  It  is  fair  that  the  bonbons  should  change 
hands,  you  have  so  often  fed  me.  This  is  the  very 
weather  that  I  lived  with  you  those  amazing  years 

that   I   had  a  father.     W.    D *s  wife   came  in 

last  week  for  a  day  and  a  night,  saying  her  heart 

drove  her.     I  am  glad  that  you  loved  Miss  W 

on  knowing  her  nearer,  Charlotte  Bronte  said 
*  Life  is  so  constructed  that  the  event  does  not, 
cannot,  match  the  expectation.* 

The  birds  that  father  rescued  are  trifling  in  his 
trees.  How  flippant  are  the  saved !  They  were 
even  frolicking  at  his  grave,  when  Vinnie  went  there 
yesterday.  Nature  must  be  too  yoimg  to  feel,  or 
many  years  too  old. 

Now  children,  when  you  are  cutting  the  loaf,  a 
crumb,  peradventure  a  crust,  of  love  for  the  spar- 
rows' table.  ,  .  . 


282  LETTERS  OR  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1876 

[August,  1876.] 

Dear    Cousins,  —  Mr  S had   spoken  with 

pleasure  of  you,  before  you  spoke  of  him.  Good 
times  are  always  mutual ;  that  is  what  makes  good 
times.     I  am  glad  it  cheered  you. 

We  have  had  no  rain  for  six  weeks  except  one 
thunder  shower,  and  that  so  terrible  that  we  locked 
the  doors,  and  the  clock  stopped  —  which  made  it 
like  Judgment  day.     The  heat  is  very  great,  and 

the  grass  so  still  that  the  flies  speck  it.    I  fear  L 

will  despair.  The  notices  of  the  '  fall  trade  *  in  the 
hurrying  dailies,  have  a  whiff  of  coolness. 

Vinnie  has  a  new  pussy  the  color  of  Branwell 
Bronte's  hair.  She  thinks  it  a  little  '  lower  than  the 
angels,*  and  I  concur  with  her.  You  remember  my 
ideal  cat  has  always  a  huge  rat  in  its  mouth,  just  going 
out  of  sight  —  though  going  out  of  sight  in  itself  has 
a  peculiar  charm.  It  is  true  that  the  unknown  is 
the  largest  need  of  the  intellect,  though  for  it,  no 
one  thinks  to  thank  God.  .  .  .  Mother  is  worn 
with  the  heat,  but  otherwise  not  altering.  I  dream 
about  father  every  night,  always  a  different  dream, 
and  forget  what  I  am  doing  daytimes,  wondering 
where  he  is.  Without  anybody,  I  keep  thinking. 
What  kind  can  that  be? 

Dr  Steams  died  homelike,  asked  Eliza  for  a  saucer 
of  strawberries,  which  she  brought  him,  but  he  had 
no  hands.  '  In  such  an  hour  as  ye  think  not '  means 
something  when  you  try  it. 

Lovingly^  Emily.. 


1876]  TO   THE  MISSES  283 

[November.] 

.  .  .  Oh  that  beloved  witch-hazel  which  would  not 
reach  me  till  part  of  the  stems  were  a  gentle  brown, 
though  one  loved  stalk  as  hearty  as  if  just  placed  in 
the  mail  by  the  woods.  It  looked  like  tinsel  fringe 
combined  with  staider  fringes,  witch  and  witching 
too,  to  my  joyful  mind. 

I  never  had  seen  it  but  once  before,  and  it 
haunted  me  like  childhood's  Indian  pipe,  or  ecstatic 
puff-balls,  or  that  mysterious  apple  that  sometimes 
comes  on  river-pinks ;  and  is  there  not  a  dim  sug- 
gestion of  a  dandelion,  if  her  hair  were  ravelled  and 
she  grew  on  a  twig  instead  of  a  tube,  —  though  this 
is  timidly  submitted.  For  taking  Nature's  hand  to 
lead  her  to  me,  I  am  softly  grateful  —  was  she  will- 
ing to  come  ?  Though  her  reluctances  are  sweeter 
than  other  ones'  avowals. 

Trusty  as  the  stars 
Who  quit  their  shining  working 
Prompt  as  when  I  lit  them 
In  Genesis'  new  house. 
Durable  as  dawn  ^, 

Whose  antiquated  blossom 
Makes  a  world's  suspense 
Perish  and  rejoice. 

Love  for  the  cousin  sisters,  and  the  lovely 
alien.  .  .  . 

Lovingly, 

Emily. 


284  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1879 

[About  July  4,  1879.] 

Dear  Cousins,  —  Did  you  know  there  had  been  a 
fire  here,  and  that  but  for  a  whim  of  the  wind  Austin 
and  Vinnie  and  Emily  would  have  all  been  home- 
less?    But  perhaps  you  saw  The  Republican. 

We  were  waked  by  the  ticking  of  the  bells,  —  the 
bells  tick  in  Amherst  for  a  fire,  to  tell  the  firemen. 

I  sprang  to  the  window,  and  each  side  of  the 
curtain  saw  that  awful  sun.  The  moon  was  shining 
high  at  the  time,  and  the  birds  singing  like 
trumpets. 

Vinnie  came  soft  as  a  moccasin,  *  Don't  be  afraid, 
Emily,  it  is  only  the  fourth  of  July.* 

I  did  not  tell  that  I  saw  it,  for  I  thought  if  she 
felt  it  best  to  deceive,  it  must  be  that  it  was. 

She  took  hold  of  my  hand  and  led  me  into 
mother's  room.  Mother  had  not  waked,  and  Maggie 
was  sitting  by  her.  Vinnie  left  us  a  moment,  and 
I  whispered  to  Maggie,  and  asked  her  what  it  was. 

'  Only  Stebbins's  bam,  Emily  ;  *  but  I  knew  that 
the  right  and  left  of  the  village  was  on  the  arm  of 
Stebbins's  bam.  I  could  hear  buildings  falling,  and 
oil  exploding,  and  people  walking  and  talking  gayly, 
and  cannon  soft  as  velvet  from  parishes  that  did  not 
know  that  we  were  burning  up. 

And  so  much  lighter  than  day  was  it,  that  I  saw 
a  caterpillar  measure  a  leaf  far  down  in  the  orchard ; 
and  Vinnie  kept  saying  bravely, '  It  *s  only  the  fourth 
of  July.' 


i8«o]  TO  THE  MISSES  285 

It  seemed  like  a  theatre,  or  a  night  in  Lon- 
don, or  perhaps  like  chaos.  The  innocent  dew 
falling  'as  if  it  thought  no  evil,*  .  .  .  and  sweet 
frogs  prattling  in  the  pools  as  if  there  were  no 
earth. 

At  seven  people  came  to  tell  us  that  the  fire  was 
stopped,  stopped  by  throwing  sound  houses  in  as 
one  fills  a  well. 

Mother  never  waked,  and  we  were  all  grateful ; 
we  knew  she  would  never  buy  needle  and  thread  at 
Mr  Cutler's  store,  and  if  it  were  Pompeii  nobody 
could  tell  her. 

The  post-office  is  in  the  old  meeting-house  where 

L and  I  went  early  to  avoid  the  crowd,  and 

fell  asleep  with  the  bumble-bees  and  the  Lord  God 
of  Elijah. 

Vinnie*s  *  only  the  fourth  of  July  *  I  shall  always 
remember.  I  think  she  will  tell  us  so  when  we  die, 
to  keep  us  from  being  afraid.  . 

Footlights  cannot  improve  the  grave,  only 
immortality. 

Forgive    me    the    personality;   but    I    knew,    I 

thought,  our  peril  was  yours. 

Love  for  you  each. 

Emily. 

[1880.] 

.  .  .  Did  the  'stars  differ*  from  each  other  in 
anything  but  *  glory,'  there  would  be  often  envy. 
The  competitions  of  the  sky  corrodeless  ply. 


286  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1880 

.  .  .  We  asked  Vinnie  to  say  in  the  rear  of  one 
of  her  mental  products  that  we  had  neuralgia,  but 
evidently  her  theme  or  her  time  did  not  admit  of 
trifles.  ...  I  forget  no  part  of  that  sweet,  smarting 
visit,  not  even  the  nettle  that  stung  my  rose. 

When  Macbeth  asked  the  physician  what  could 
be  done  for  his  wife,  he  made  the  mighty  answer, 
y  '  That  sort  must  heal  itself;  *  but,  sister,  that  was 
guilt,  and  love,  you  know,  is  God,  who  certainly 
*  gave  the  love  to  reward  the  love,*  even  were  there 
no  Browning. 

...  The  slips  of  the  last  rose  of  summer  repose 
in  kindred  soil  with  waning  bees  for  mates.  How 
softly  summer  shuts,  without  the  creaking  of  a  door, 
abroad  for  evermore. 

.  .  .  Vinnie  has  also  added  a  pilgrim  kitten  to 
her  flock,  which  besides  being  jet  black,  is,  I  think, 
a  lineal  descendant  of  the  *  beautiful  hearse  horse ' 
recommended  to  Austin. 

[December,  1880.] 

.  .  .  The  look  of  the  words  [stating  the  death  of 
George  Eliot]  as  they  lay  in  the  print  I  shall  never 
forget.  Not  their  face  in  the  casket  could  have 
had  the  eternity  to  me.  Now,  my  George  Eliot. 
;  The  gift  of  belief  which  her  greatness  denied  her, 
I  trust  she  receives  in  the  childhood  of  the  kingdom 
of  heaven.     As  childhood  is  earth's  confiding  time. 


i88i]  TO  THE  MISSES  28/ 

perhaps  having  no  childhood^  she  lost  her  way  to 
the  early  trust,  and  no  later  came.  Amazing  human 
heart,  a  syllable  can  make  to  quake  like  jostled  tree, 
what  infinite  for  thee  ?  .  ,  . 

[February,  1881.] 

.  .  .  God  is  rather  stem  with  his  'little  ones.* 
*  A  cup  of  cold  water  in  my  name  *  is  a  shivering 
legacy  February  mornings. 

.  .  .  Maggie's  brother  is  killed  in  the  mine,  and 
Maggie  wants  to  die,  but  Death  goes  far  around  to 
those  that  want  to  see  him.  If  the  little  cousins 
would  give  her  a  note  —  she  does  not  know  I  ask 
it — I  think  it  would  help  her  begin,  that  bleeding 
beginning  that  every  mourner  knows. 

[Spring,  1881.] 

The  divine  deposit  came  safely  in  the  little  bank. 
We  have  heard  of  the  'deeds  of  the  spirit,'  but  are 
his  acts  gamboge  and  pink?  A  morning  call  from 
Gabriel  is  always  a  surprise.  Were  we  more  fresh 
from  Eden  we  were  expecting  him  —  but  Genesis  is 
a  '  far  journey.*     Thank  you  for  the  loveliness. 

We  have  had  two  hurricanes  within  as  many  hours, 
one  of  which  came  near  enough  to  untie  my  apron  — 
but  this  moment  the  sun  shines,  Maggie's  hens  are 
warbling,  and  a  man  of  anonymous  wits  is  making  a 
garden  in  the  lane  to  set  out  slips  of  bluebird. 
The  moon  grows  from  the  seed.  .  .  .  Vinnie's  pussy 


288  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1881 

slept  in  grass  Wednesday  —  a  Sicilian  sjrmptom  — 

the   sails  are   set  for  summer,  East  India  wharf. 

Sage  and  saucy  ones  talk  of  an  equinoctial,  and  are 

trying  the  chimneys,  but  I  am  'short  of  hearing,' 

as  the  deaf  say.      Blessed  are  they  that  play,  for 

theirs  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven.     Love  like  a  rose 

from  each  one,  and  Maggie's  a  Burgundy  one  she 

ardently  asks. 

Emily. 

[1881.] 

My  dear  little  Cousins,  —  I  bring  you  a  robin 
who  is  eating  a  remnant  oat  on  the  sill  of  the  bam. 
The  horse  was  not  as  hungry  as  usual,  leaving  an 
ample  meal  for  his  dulcet  friend.  .  .  . 

Maggie  was  charmed  with  her  donkeys,  and  has 
long  been  talking  of  writing,  but  has  not  quite  cul- 
minated. They  stand  on  the  dining-room  side -board, 
by  the  side  of  an  orange,  and  a  Springfield  Republi- 
can, It  will  please  you  to  know  that  the  clover  in 
the  bill  of  the  brown  one  is  fresh  as  at  first,  not- 
withstanding the  time,  though  the  only  *  pastures  '  I 
know  gifted  with  that  duration,  are  far  off  as  the 
psalms. 

Mr  C called  with  a  twilight  of  you.  It  re- 
minded me  of  a  supper  I  took,  with  the  pictures  on 
Dresden  china.  Vinnie  asked  him  *what  he  had  for 
supper,*  and  he  said  he  '  could  easier  describe  the 
nectar  of  the  gods.*  .  .  .  We  read  in  a  tremendous 
Book  about  '  an  enemy,*  and  armed  a  confidential 


i88i]  TO  THE  MISSES  289 

fort  to  scatter  him  away.    The  time  has  passed,  and 

years  have  con\e,  and  yet  not  any  *  Satan.*     I  think 

he  must  be  making  war  upon  some  other  nation. 

Emily. 

[1881.] 

ft 

The  dear  ones  will  excuse  —  they  knew  there 
was  a  cause.  Emily  was  sick,  and  Vinnie's  middle 
name  restrained  her  loving  pen. 

These  are  my  first  words  since  I  left  my  pillow 
—  that  will  make  them  faithful,  although  so  long 
withheld.  We  had  another  fire  —  it  was  in  Phoenix 
Row,  Monday  a  week  ago,  at  two  in  the  night.  The 
horses  were  harnessed  to  move  the  office  —  Austin's 
office,  I  mean.  After  a  night  of  terror,  we  went  to 
sleep  for  a  few  moments,  and  I  could  not  rise. 
The  others  bore  it  better.  The  brook  from  Pelham 
saved  the  town.  The  wind  was  blowing  so,  it 
carried  the  burning  shingles  as  far  as  Tom*s  piazza. 
We  are  weak  and  grateful.  The  fire -bells  are 
oftener  now,  almost,  than  the  church- bells.  Thoreau 
would  wonder  which  did  the  most  harm. 

The  little  gifts  came  sweetly.  The  bulbs  are  in 
the  sod  —  the  seeds  in  homes  of  paper  till  the  sun 
calls  them.  It  is  snowing  now.  ...  *  Fine  sleighing 
we  have  this  summer,*  says  Austin  with  a  scoff.  The 
box  of  dainty  ones  —  I  don't  know  what  they  were, 
buttons  of  spice  for  coats  of  honey  —  pleased  the 
weary  mother.     Thank  you  each  for  all. 

The  beautiful  words  for  which  L asked  were 


290  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [i88i 

that  genius  is  the  ignition  of  affection — not  intellect, 
as  is  supposed, —  the  exaltation  of  devotion,  and  in 
proportion  to  our  capacity  for  that,  is  our  experience 
of  genius.  Precisely  as  they  were  uttered  I  cannot 
give  them,  they  were  in  a  lettet  that  I  do  not  find, 
but  the  suggestion  was  this. 

It  is  startling  to  think  that  the  lips,  which  are 
keepers  of  thoughts  so  magical,  yet  at  any  moment 
are  subject  to  the  seclusion  of  death. 

...  I  must  leave  you,  dear,  to  come  perhaps 

again,  — 

1 

;   We  never  know  we  go  —  when  we  are  going 
We  jest  and  shut  the  door  — 
Fate  following  behind  us  bolts  it 
And  we  accost  no  more. 


I  give  you  my  parting  love. 


Emily. 


[Autumn,  1881.] 

Saturday. 

Dear  Ones,  —  If  I  linger,  this  will  not  reach  you 
before  Sunday ;  if  I  do  not,  I  must  write  you  much 
less  than  I  would  love.  *Do  unto  others  as  ye 
would  that  they  should  do  unto  you.'  I  would 
rather  they  would  do  unto  me  so. 

After  infinite  wanderings  the  little  note  has 
reached  us.  It  was  mailed  the  twelfth — we  received 
it  the  twenty- third.  The  address '  Misses  Dickinson ' 
misled   the  rustic   eyes  —  the    postmaster    knows 


i88i]  TO  THE  MISSES  291 

Vinnie,  also  by  faith  who  Emily  is,  because  his  little 
girl  was  hurt,  and  Emily  sent  her  juleps  —  but  he 
failed  of  the  intellectual  grasp  to  combine  the 
names.  So  after  sending  it  to  all  the  Mrs  Dickin- 
sons he  could  discover,  he  consigned  it  to  us,  with 
the  request  that  we  would  speedily  return  it  if  not 
ours,  that  he  might  renew  his  research.  Almost  any 
one  under  the  circumstances  would  have  doubted  if 
it  were  theirs,  or  indeed  if  they  were  themself —  but 
to  us  it  was  clear.     Next  time,  dears,  direct  Vinnie, 

or  Emily,  and  perhaps  Mr *s  astuteness  may 

be  adequate.  I  enclose  the  battered  remains  for 
your  Sabbath  perusal,  and  tell  you  we  think  of  you 
tenderly,  which  I  trust  you  often  believe. 

Maggie  is  making  a  flying  visit  to  cattle-show, 
on  her  very  robust  wings  —  for  Maggie  is  getting 
corpulent.  Vinnie  is  picking  a  few  seeds  —  for  if  a 
pod  *die,  shall  he  not  live  again';  and  with  the 
shutting  mail  I  go  to  read  to  mother  about  the 
President.  When  we  think  of  the  lone  effort  to  live, 
and  its  bleak  reward,  the  mind  turns  to  the  myth 
*for  His  mercy  endureth  forever,'  with  confiding 
revulsion.  Still,  when  Professor  Fisk  died  on  Mount 
Zion,  Dr  Humphrey  prayed  *  to  whom  shall  we  turn 
but  thee ? '  'I  have  finished,'  said  Paul,  ' the  faith.' 
We  rejoice  that  he  did  not  say  discarded  it. 

The  little  postman  has  come  —  Thomas's  '  second 
oldest,'  and  I  close  with  reluctant  and  hurrying 
love. 

Emblv. 


292  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1881 

[1881.] 

What  is  it  that  instructs  a  hand  lightly  created,  to 
impel  shapes  to  eyes  at  a  distance,  which  for  them 
have  the  whole  area  of  life  or  of  death?  Yet  not  a 
pencil  in  the  street  but  has  this  awful  power,  though 
nobody  arrests  it.  An  earnest  letter  is  or  should  be 
life- warrant  or  death-warrant,  for  what  is  each  in- 
stant but  a  gun,  harmless  because  *  unloaded,'  but 
that  touched  '  goes  off '  ? 

Men  are  picking  up  the  apples  to-day,  and  the 
pretty  boarders  are  leaving  the  trees,  birds  and  ants 
and  bees.  I  have  heard  a  chipper  say  *  dee '  six 
times  in  disapprobation.  How  should  we  like  to 
have  our  privileges  wheeled  away  in  a  barrel  ?  .  .  . 

The  Essex  visit  was  lovely.     Mr  L remained 

a  week.     Mrs  re-decided  to  come  with  her 

son  Elizabeth.      Aunt  L shouldered  arms.     I 

think  they  lie  in  my  memory,  a  muffin  and  a  bomb. 
Now  they  are  all  gone,  and  the  crickets  are  pleased. 
Their  bombazine  reproof  still  falls  upon  the  twilight, 
and  checks  the  softer  uproars  of  the  departing  day. 

Earnest  love  to  F .    This  is  but  a  fragment^ 

but  wholes  are  not  below. 

Emily. 

Dear  L , — Thank  you,  with  love,  for  the  kind- 
ness j  it  would  be  very  sweet  to  claim  if  we  needed 
it,  but  we  are  quite  strong,  and  mother  well  as 
usual,  and  Vinnie  spectacular  as  Disraeli  and  sincere 


i88i]  TO   THE  MISSES  293 

as  Gladstone,  —  was  only  sighing  in  fun.  When 
she  sighs  in  earnest,  Emily*s  throne  will  tremble,  and 

she  will  need  both  L and  F ;  but  Vinnie 

'  still  prevails.*  When  one  or  all  of  us  are  lain  on 
*  Marian  Erie's  dim  pallet,'  so  cool  that  she  deplored 

to  live  because  that  she  must  leave  it,  L and  the 

ferns,  and  F and  her  fan  shall  supplement  the 

angels,  if  they  have  not  already  joined  them. 

Lovingly,  Emily. 

[October,  188 1.] 

Did  the  little  sisters  know  that  Dr  Holland  had 
died  —  the  dark  man  with  the  doll- wife,  whom  they 
used  to  see  at  *  Uncle  Edward's '  before  *  Uncle 
Edward*  went  too? 

Do  they  know  any  of  the  circumstances  ? 

Did  they  know  that  the  weary  hfe  in  the  second 
story  had  mourned  to  hear  from  them,  and  whether 
they  were  '  comfortable  *  ?  *  Comfortable  *  seems 
to  comprise  the  whole  to  those  whose  days  are  weak. 
'  Happiness  *  is  for  birds  and  other  foreign  nations, 
in  their  faint  esteem. 

Mother  heard   F telling  Vinnie   about   her 

graham  bread.  She  would  like  to  taste  it.  Will 
F please  write  Emily  how,  and  not  too  incon- 
venient? Every  particular,  for  Emily  is  dull,  ajid 
she  will  pay  in  gratitude,  which,  though  not  canned 
like  quinces,  is  fragrantest  of  all  we  know. 

Tell  us  just  how  and  where  they  are,  and  if  October 

sunshine  is  thoughtful  of  their  heads. 

VOL.  II.  —  5  Emily. 


294  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [i88a 

.  .  .  Thank  you,  dear,  for  the  quickness  which  is 
the  blossom  of  request,  and  for  the  definiteness —  for  a 
new  rule  is  a  chance.  The  bread  resulted  charmingly, 
and  such  pretty  little  proportions,  quaint  as  a 
druggist's  formula  —  'I  do  remember  an  apothe- 
cary.* Mother  and  Vinnie  think  it  the  nicest  they 
have  ever  known,  and  Maggie  so  extols  it. 

Mr  Lathrop's  poem  was  piteously  sweet.* 

To  know  of  your  homes  is  comforting.  I  trust 
they  are  both  peace.  Home  is  the  riddle  of  the 
wise  —  the  booty  of  the  dove.  God  bless  the  sun- 
shine in  L 's  room,  and  could  he  find  a  sweeter 

task  than  to  '  temper  the  wind  '  to  her  curls  ?  .  .  . 

Tell  us  when  you  are  happy,  but  be  sure  and  tell 
us  when  you  are  sad,  for  Emily's  heart  is  the  edifice 
where  the  *  wicked  cease  from  troubling.' 

[January,  1882.] 

I  have  only  a  moment,  exiles,  but  you  shall  have 
the  largest  half.  Mother's  dear  little  wants  so 
engross  the  time,  —  to  read  to  her,  to  fan  her,  to 
tell  her  health  will  come  to-morrow,  to  explain  to 
her  why  the  grasshopper  is  a  burden,  because  he  is 
not  so  new  a  grasshopper  as  he  was,  —  this  is  so 
ensuing,  I  hardly  have  said  *  Good-morning,  mother,* 
when  I  hear  myself  saying  *  Mother,  good-night.' 

1  This  reference  is  to  the  pathetic  verses  to  his  little  boy, 
by  Mr  George  Parsons  Lathrop,  beginning,  — 

'  Do  you  remember,  my  sweet  absent  son/ 


i882]  TO   THE  MISSES  295 

[November,  1882.] 

Dear  Cousins,  —  I  hoped  to  write  you  before, 
but  mother's  dying  almost  stunned  my  spirit. 

I  have  answered  a  few  inquiries  of  love,  but 
written  little  intuitively.  She  was  scarcely  the  aunt 
you  knew.  The  great  mission  of  pain  had  been 
ratified  —  cultivated  to  tenderness  by  persistent 
sorrow,  so  that  a  larger  mother  died  than  had  she 
died  before.  There  was  no  earthly  parting.  She 
slipped  from  our  fingers  like  a  flake  gathered  by  the 
wind,  and  is  now  part  of  the  drift  called  *the 
infinite.' 

We  don't  know  where  she  is,  though  so  many  tell 
us. 

I  believe  we  shall  in  some  manner  be  cherished 
by  our  Maker  —  that  the  One  who  gave  us  this 
remarkable  earth  has  the  power  still  farther  to  \ 
surprise  that  which  He  has  caused.  Beyond  that  all  . 
is  silence.  ...  1 

Mother  was  very  beautiful  when  she  had  died.  ! 
Seraphs  are  solemn  artists.  The  illumination  that  ) 
comes  but  once  paused  upon  her  features,  and  it  j 
seemed  like  hiding  a  picture  to  lay  her  in  the  grave  ;  \ 
but  the  grass  that  received  my  father  will  suffice 
his  guest,  the  one  he  asked  at  the  altar  to  visit  him 
all  his  life. 

I  cannot  tell  how  Eternity  seems.  It  sweeps 
around  me  like  a  sea.  .  .  .  Thank  you  for  remem- 
bering me.     Remembrance  —  mighty  word. 


296  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1883 

'  Thou  gavest  it  to  me  from  the  foundation  of  the 

world.* 

Lovingly, 

Emily. 

[Spring,  1883.] 

Thank  you,  dears,  for  the  sympathy.  I  hardly 
dare  to  know  that  I  have  lost  another  friend,  but 
anguish  finds  it  out. 

Each  that  we  lose  takes  part  of  us ; 
A  crescent  still  abides, 
Which  like  the  moon,  some  turbid  night, 
Is  summoned  by  the  tides. 

...  I  work  to  drive  the  awe  away,  yet  awe  impels 
the  work. 

I  almost  picked  the  crocuses,  you  told  them  so 
sincerely.  Spring's  first  conviction  is  a  wealth  be- 
yond its  whole  experience. 

The  sweetest  way  I  think  of  you  is  when  the  day 

is  done,  and  L sets  the  '  sunset  tree '  for  the 

little   sisters.     Dear  F has  had   many  stormy 

mornings ;  .  .  .  I  hope  they  have  not  chilled  her 
feet,  nor  dampened  her  heart.  I  am  glad  the  little 
visit  rested  you.  Rest  and  water  are  most  we 
want. 

I  know  each  moment  of  Miss  W is  a  gleam  of 

boundlessness.  *  Miles  and  miles  away,'  said  Brown- 
ing, *  there's  a  girl;*  but  *  the  colored  end  of 
evening  smiles  *  on  but  few  so  rare. 


1884]  TO   THE  MISSES  297 

Thank  you  once  more  for  being  sorry.     Till  the 

first  friend  dies,  we  think  ecstasy  impersonal,  but 

then  discover  that  he  was  the  cup  from  which  we 

drank  it,  itself  as  yet  unknown.     Sweetest  love  for 

each,  and  a  kiss  besides  for  Miss  W *s  cheek, 

should  you  again  meet  her. 

Emily. 

[July,  1884.] 

Dear  Cousins,  —  I  hope  you  heard  Mr  Sanborn's 
lecture.  My  Republican  was  borrowed  before  I 
waked,  to  read  till  my  own  dawn,  which  is  rather 
tardy,  for  I  have  been  quite  sick,  and  could  claim 
the  immortal  reprimand,  'Mr  Lamb,  you  come 
down  very  late  in  the  morning.*  Eight  Saturday 
noons  ago,  I  was  making  a  loaf  of  cake  with  Maggie, 
when  I  saw  a  great  darkness  coming  and  knew  no 
more  until  late  at  night.  I  woke  to  find  Austin  and 
Vinnie  and  a  strange  physician  bending  over  me, 
and  supposed  I  was  dying,  or  had  died,  all  was  so 
kind  and  hallowed.  1  had  fainted  and  lain  uncon- 
scious for  the  first  time  in  my  life.  Then  I  grew 
very  sick  and  gave  the  others  much  alarm,  but  am 
now  staying.  The  doctor  calls  it  *  revenge  of  the 
nerves;*  but  who  but  Death  had  wronged  them? 

F 's  dear  note  has  lain  unanswered  for  this  long 

season,  though  its  '  Good- night,  my  dear,*  warmed 
me  to  the  core.  I  have  all  to  say,  but  little  strength 
to  say  it ;  so  we  must  talk  by  degrees.    I  do  want  to 

know  about  L ,  what  pleases  her  most,  book  or 

tune  or  friend. 


^ 


298  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1885 

I  am  glad  the  housekeeping  is  kinder;  it  is  a 
prickly  art.  Maggie  is  with  us  still,  warm  and  wild 
and  mighty,  and  we  have  a  gracious  boy  at  the  bam. 
We  remember  you  always,  and  one  or  the  other 

often  comes  down  with  a  '  we  dreamed  of  F 

and  I J last  night ;  *  then  that  day  we  think  we 

shall  hear  from  you,  for  dreams  are  couriers. 

The  little  boy  we  laid  away  never  fluctuates,  and 
his  dim  society  is  companion  still.  But  it  is  growing 
damp  and  I  must  go  in.     Memory's  fog  is  rising. 

The  going  from  a  world  we  know 

To  one  a  wonder  still 
Is  like  the  child's  adversity 

Whose  vista  is  a  hill, 
Behind  the  hill  is  sorcery 

And  everything  unknown, 
But  will  the  secret  compensate 

For  climbing  it  alone  ? 

Vinnie's  love  and  Maggie's,  and  mine  is  pre- 
supposed. Emily. 

[January  14,  1885.] 

Had  we  less  to  say  to  those  we  love,  perhaps  we 
should  say  it  oftener,  but  the  attempt  comes,  then 
the  inundation,  then  it  is  all  over,  as  is  said  of  the 
dead. 

Vinnie  dreamed  about  F last  night,  and  de- 
signing for  days  to  write  dear  L ,  —  dear,  both 

of  you,  —  indeed,  with  the  astounding  nearness 
which  a  dream  brings,  I  must  speak  this  morning. 


1885]  TO   THE  MISSES  299 

I  do  hope  you  are  well,  and  that  the  last  enchanting 
days  have  refreshed  your  spirits,  and  I  hope  the 
poor  little  girl  is  better,  and  the  sorrow  at  least 
adjourned. 

L asked  *  what  books  *  we  were  wooing  now  — 

watching  like  a  vulture  for  Walter  Cross's  life  of  his 
wife.  A  friend  sent  me  Called  Back,  It  is  a 
haunting  story,  and  as  loved  Mr  Bowles  used  to  say, 
'greatly  impressive  to  me.'  Do  you  remember  the 
little  picture  with  his  deep  face  in  the  centre,  and 
Governor  Bross  on  one  side,  and  Colfax  on  the 
other?  The  third  of  the  group  died  yesterday,  so 
somewhere  they  are  again  together. 

Moving  to  Cambridge  seems  to  me  Uke  moving 
to  Westminster  Abbey,  as  hallowed  and  as  un- 
believed,  or  moving  to  Ephesus  with  Paul  for  a 
next-door  neighbor. 

Holmes's  Life  of  Emerson  is  sweetly  commended, 
but  you,  I  know,  have  tasted  that.  .  .  .  But  the  whistle 
calls  me  —  I  have  not  begun  —  so  with  a  moan,  and 
a  kiss,  and  a  promise  of  more,  and  love  from  Vinnie 
and  Maggie,  and  the  half-blown  carnation,  and  the 
western  sky,  I  stop. 

That  we  are  permanent  temporarily,  it  is  warm 

to  know,  though  we  know  no  more. 

Emily. 


CHAPTER  VII 
To  Mr  Thomas  Wentworth  Higginson 

IN  his  article  upon  Emily  Dickinson  in 
The  Atlantic  Monthly  for  October,  1891, 
Colonel  Higginson  has  already  given  many 
of  her  letters  to  himself.  The  rest  are  here 
added. 

The  first  one,  enclosing  four  of  her  now 
widely  known  poems  for  his  criticism,  was 
without  signature,  but  accompanied  by  a  card 
bearing  her  name.  Her  wish  for  an  impartial 
and  extrinsic  judgment  from  a  stranger  may, 
perhaps,  illustrate  Mrs  Ford's  suggestion  that 
*  she  was  longing  for  poetic  sympathy.*  At  a 
time  when  she  was  but  newly  trying  her  own 
wings,  she  must  have  felt  something  warmly 
and  essentially  human  in  Colonel  Higginson's 
writing  to  be  thus  led  to  ask  his  help  rather 
than  another's,  —  an  intuition  most  happily 
justified. 

He  received  the  first  of  her  unique  letters 
at  the  beginning  of  *  war  time.'  Unfortunately 
his  answers  cannot  now  be  found : 


i862]  TO  MR   T.   W.  HIGGINSON  3OI 

[April  16, 1862.] 

Mr  Higginson,  —  Are  you  too  deeply  occupied  to 
say  if  my  verse  is  alive  ? 

The  mind  is  so  near  itself  it  cannot  see  distinctly, 
and  I  have  none  to  ask. 

Should  you  think  it  breathed,  and  had  you  the 
leisure  to  tell  me,  I  should  feel  quick  gratitude. 

If  I  make  the  mistake,  that  you  dared  to  tell  me 
would  give  me  sincerer  honor  toward  you. 

I  enclose  my  name,  asking  you,  if  you  please,  sir, 
to  tell  me  what  is  true  ? 

That  you  will  not  betray  me  it  is  needless  to  ask, 
since  honor  is  its  own  pawn. 

[April  26, 1862.] 

Mr  HiGGmsoN,  —  Your  kindness  claimed  earlier 
gratitude,  but  I  was  ill,  and  write  to-day  from  my 
pillow. 

Thank  you  for  the  surgery ;  it  was  not  so  painful 
as  I  supposed.  I  bring  you  others,  as  you  ask, 
though  they  might  not  differ.  While  my  thought  is 
undressed,  I  can  make  the  distinction ;  but  when  I 
put  them  in  the  gown,  they  look  ahke  and  numb. 

You  asked  how  old  I  was  ?  I  made  no  verse,  but 
one  or  two,  until  this  winter,  sir. 

I  had  a  terror  since  September,  I  could  tell  to 
none ;  and  so  I  sing,  as  the  boy  does  of  the  burying 
ground,  because  I  am  afraid. 

You  inquire  my  books.     For  poets,  I  have  Keats, 


302  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1862 

and  Mr  and  Mrs  Browning.  For  prose,  Mr  Ruskin, 
Sir  Thomas  Browne,  and  the  Revelations.  I  went 
to  school,  but  in  your  manner  of  the  phrase  had  no 
education.  When  a  little  girl,  I  had  a  friend  who 
taught  me  Immortality;  but  venturing  too  near, 
himself,  he  never  returned.  Soon  after  my  tutor 
died,  and  for  several  years  my  lexicon  was  my  only 
companion.  Then  I  found  one  more,  but  he  was 
not  contented  I  be  his  scholar,  so  he  left  the  land. 

You  ask  of  my  companions.  Hills,  sir,  and  the 
sundown,  and  a  dog  large  as  myself,  that  my  father 
bought  me.  They  are  better  than  beings  because 
they  know,  but  do  not  tell;  and  the  noise  in  the 
pool  at  noon  excels  my  piano. 

I  have  a  brother  and  sister ;  my  mother  does  not 
care  for  thought,  and  father,  too  busy  with  his  briefs 
to  notice  what  we  do.  He  buys  me  many  books, 
but  begs  me  not  to  read  them,  because  he  fears  they 
joggle  the  mind.  They  are  religious,  except  me, 
and  address  an  eclipse,  every  morning,  whom  they 
call  their  '  Father.' 

But  I  fear  my  story  fatigues  you.  I  would  like 
to  learn.  Could  you  tell  me  how  to  grow,  or  is  it 
unconveyed,  like  melody  or  witchcraft? 

You  speak  of  Mr  Whitman.  I  never  read  his 
book,  but  was  told  that  it  was  disgraceful. 

I  read  Miss  Prescott's  Circumstance,  but  it  fol- 
lowed me  in  the  dark,  so  I  avoided  her. 

Two  editors  of  journals  came  to  my  father's  house 
this  winter,  and  asked  me  for  my  mind,  and  when  I 


i862]  TO  MR   T,  W.  HIGGINSON  303 

asked  them  *  why '  they  said  I  was  penurious,  and 
they  would  use  it  for  the  world. 

I  could  not  weigh  myself,  myself.  My  size  felt 
small  to  me.  I  read  your  chapters  in  The  Atlantic^ 
and  experienced  honor  for  you.  I  was  sure  you 
would  not  reject  a  confiding  question. 

Is  this,  sir,  what  you  asked  me  to  tell  you? 

Your  friend, 

E.  Dickinson. 

[June  8;  1862.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  Your  letter  gave  no  drunkenness, 
because  I  tasted  rum  before.  Domingo  comes  but 
once ;  yet  I  have  had  few  pleasures  so  deep  as  your 
opinion,  and  if  I  tried  to  thank  you,  my  tears  would 
block  my  tongue. 

My  dying  tutor  told  me  that  he  would  like  to  live 
till  I  had  been  a  poet,  but  Death  was  much  of  mob 
as  I  could  master,  then.  And  when,  far  afterward, 
a  sudden  light  on  orchards,  or  a  new  fashion  in  the 
wind  troubled  my  attention,  I  felt  a  palsy,  here,  the 
verses  just  relieve. 

Your  second  letter  surprised  me,  and  for  a  mo- 
ment, swung.  I  had  not  supposed  it.  Your  first 
gave  no  dishonor,  because  the  true  are  not  ashamed. 
I  thanked  you  for  your  justice,  but  could  not  drop 
the  bells  whose  jingling  cooled  my  tramp.  Perhaps 
the  balm  seemed  better,  because  you  bled  me  first. 
I  smile  when  you  suggest  that  I  delay  *  to  publish,' 
that  being  foreign  to  my  thought  as  firmament 
to  fin. 


304  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [i86a 

If  fame  belonged  to  me,  I  could  not  escape  her ; 
if  she  did  not,  the  longest  day  would  pass  me  on 
the  chase,  and  the  approbation  of  my  dog  would 
forsake  me  then.     My  barefoot  rank  is  better. 

You  think  my  gait  '  spasmodic*  I  am  in  dan- 
ger, sir.  You  think  me  '  uncontrolled.*  I  have  no 
tribunal. 

Would  you  have  time  to  be  the  'friend*  you 
should  think  I  need  ?  I  have  a  little  shape :  it 
would  not  crowd  your  desk,  nor  make  much  racket 
as  the  mouse  that  dents  your  galleries. 

If  I  might  bring  you  what  I  do  —  not  so  frequent 
to  trouble  you  —  and  ask  you  if  I  told  it  clear, 
*  *t  would  be  control  to  me.  The  sailor  cannot  see 
the  north,  but  knows  the  needle  can.  The  *  hand 
you  stretch  me  in  the  dark  *  I  put  mine  in,  and  turn 
away.     I  have  no  Saxon  now  :  — 

As  if  I  asked  a  common  alms. 
And  in  my  wondering  hand 
A  stranger  pressed  a  kingdom, 
And  I,  bewildered,  stand ; 
As  if  I  asked  the  Orient 
Had  it  for  me  a  morn, 
And  it  should  lift  its  purple  dikes 
And  shatter  me  with  dawn ! 

But,  will  you  be  my  preceptor,  Mr  Higginson? 

After  these  startling  letters  it  was  but  natu- 
ral that  Mr  Higginson  should  have  asked  to 
see  a  photograph  of  his  *  enigmatical  corre- 
spondent.'    But  there  was  none.     She  had  an 


i862]  TO  MR   T.   W,  HIGGINSON  305 

unconquerable  aversion  to  seeing  herself  re- 
produced in  any  sort  of  *  mould.'  The  frontis- 
piece to  the  first  volume  of  these  Letters  is 
taken  from  an  oil  painting  of  Emily,  when 
she  was  but  eight  years  old,  in  a  group  with 
her  brother  and  sister.  The  only  other  known 
representation  of  her  face  is  a  daguerrotype 
made  a  few  years  later;  but  it  is  entirely  un- 
satisfactory, both  in  expression  and  individual- 
ity. Instead  of  her  photograph,  she  sent  this 
verbal  portrait.  Her  coy  avoidance  of  Mr 
Higginson's  request  was  as  characteristically 
piquant  as  her  answer  to  his  question  of  her 
age:  — 

[July,  1862.] 

Could  you  believe  me  without?  I  had  no  por- 
trait, now,  but  am  small,  like  the  wren;  and  my 
hair  is  bold,  like  the  chestnut  burr ;  and  my  eyes, 
like  the  sherry  in  the  glass  that  the  guest  leaves. 
Would  this  do  just  as  well? 

It  often  alarms  father.  He  says  death  might 
occur,  and  he  has  moulds  of  all  the  rest,  but  has 
no  mould  of  me ;  but  I  noticed  the  quick  wore  off 
those  things  in  a  few  days,  and  forestall  the  dis- 
honor.    You  will  think  no  caprice  of  me. 

You  said  '  dark.*  I  know  the  butterfly,  and  the 
lizard,  and  the  orchis.  Are  not  those  your 
countrymen  ? 

I  am  happy  to  be  your  scholar,  and  will  deserve 
the  kindness  I  cannot  repay. 


306  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1862 

If  you  truly  consent,  I  recite  now.  Will  you  tell 
me  my  fault,  frankly,  as  to  yourself,  for  I  had  rather 
wince  than  die.  Men  do  not  call  the  surgeon  to 
commend  the  bone,  but  to  set  it,  sir,  and  fracture 
within  is  more  critical.  And  for  this,  preceptor,  I 
shall  bring  you  obedience,  the  blossom  from  my 
garden,  and  every  gratitude  I  know. 

Perhaps  you  smile  at  me,  I  could  not  stop  for 
that.  My  business  is  circumference.  An  ignorance, 
not  of  customs,  but  if  caught  with  the  dawn,  o^the 
sunset  see  me,  myself  the  only  kangaroo  among  the 
beauty,  sir,  if  you  please,  it  afflicts  me,  and  I  thought 
that  instruction  would  take  it  away. 

Because  you  have  much  business,  beside  the 
growth  of  me,  you  will  appoint,  yourself,  how  often 
I  shall  come  without  your  inconvenience. 

And  if  at  any  time  you  regret  you  received  me,  or 
I  prove  a  different  fabric  to  that  you  supposed,  you 
must  banish  me. 

When  1  state  myself,  as  the  representative  of  the 
verse,  it  does  not  mean  me,  but  a  supposed  person. 

You  are  true  about  the  *  perfection.*  To-day 
makes  yesterday  mean. 

You  spoke  of  Pippa  Passes.  I  never  heard  any- 
body speak  of  Pippa  Passes  before.  You  see  my 
posture  is  benighted. 

To  thank  you  baffles  me.  Are  you  perfectly  pow- 
erful ?    Had  1  a  pleasure  you  had  not,  I  could  delight 

to  bring  it. 

Your  Scholar. 


i862]  TO  MR  T,   W,  HIGGINSON  307 

Colonel  Higginson  wrote,  *  It  would  seem 
that  at  first  I  tried  a  little  —  a  very  little  —  to 
lead  her  in  the  direction  of  rules  and  tradi- 
tions ;  but  I  fear  it  was  only  perfunctory,  and 
that  she  interested  me  more  in  her  —  so  to 
speak  —  unregenerate  condition.  Still,  she 
recognizes  the  endeavor.  In  this  case,  as  will 
be  seen,  I  called  her  attention  to  the  fact  that 
while  she  took  pains  to  correct  the  spelling  of 
a  word,  she  was  utterly  careless  of  greater 
irregularities.  It  will  be  seen  by  her  answer 
that  with  her  usual  naYve  adroitness  she  turns 
my  point ' :  — 

Dear  Friend,  —  Are  these  more  orderly?  I 
thank  you  for  the  truth. 

I  had  no  monarch  in  my  life,  and  cannot  rule 
myself;  and  when  I  try  to  organize,  my  little  force 
explodes  and  leaves  me  bare  and  charred. 

I  think  you  called  me  '  wayward.*  Will  you  help 
me  improve? 

I  suppose  the  pride  that  stops  the  breath,  in  the 
core  of  woods,  is  not  of  ourself. 

You  say  I  confess  the  little  mistake,  and  omit  the 
large.  Because  I  can  see  orthography;  but  the 
ignorance  out  of  sight  is  my  preceptor's  charge. 

Of  'shunning  men  and  women,'  —  they  talk  of 
hallowed  things,  aloud,  and  embarrass  my  dog.  He 
and  I  don't  object  to  them,  if  they  *11  exist  their 


308  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [i86a 

side.  I  think  Carl  would  please  you.  He  is  dumb, 
and  brave.  I  think  you  would  like  the  chestnut- 
tree  I  met  in  my  walk.  It  hit  my  notice  suddenly, 
and  I  thought  the  skies  were  in  blossom. 

Then  there  *s  a  noiseless  noise  in  the  orchard  that 
I  let  persons  hear. 

You  told  me  in  one  letter  you  could  not  come  to 
see  me  *  now/  and  I  made  no  answer ;  not  because 
I  had  none,  but  did  not  think  myself  the  price  that 
you  should  come  so  far. 

I  do  not  ask  so  large  a  pleasure,  lest  you  might 
deny  me. 

You  say,  '  Beyond  your  knowledge.'  You  would 
not  jest  with  me,  because  I  believe  you;  but,  pre- 
ceptor, you  cannot  mean  it? 

All  men  say  '  What  *  to  me,  but  1  thought  it  a 
fashion. 

When  much  in  the  woods,  as  a  little  girl,  I  was 
told  that  the  snake  would  bite  me,  that  I  might  pick 
a  poisonous  flower,  or  goblins  kidnap  me;  but  I 
went  along  and  met  no  one  but  angels,  who  were  for 
shyer  of  me  than  I  could  be  of  them,  so  I  have  n't 
that  confidence  in  fraud  which  many  exercise. 

I  shall  observe  your  precept,  though  I  don't  un- 
derstand it,  always. 

I  marked  a  line  in  one  verse,  because  I  met  it 
after  I  made  it,  and  never  consciously  touch  a  paint 
mixed  by  another  person.  I  do  not  let  go  it,  be- 
cause it  is  mine. 

Have  you  the  portrait  of  Mrs  Browning?    Per- 


1863]  TO  MR  T.   IV.  HIGGINSOf/  3C9 

sons  sent  me  three.    If  you  had  none,  will  you  have 

mine? 

Your  Scholar. 

After  entering  the  volunteer  army  of  the 
Civil  War,  Colonel  Higginson  received  the  fol- 
lowing letter  while  in  camp  in  South  Carolina, 

early  in  1863:  — 

Amherst. 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  did  not  deem  that  planetary 
forces  annulled,  but  suffered  an  exchange  of  terri- 
tory, or  world. 

I  should  have  liked  to  see  you  before  you  became 
improbable.  War  feels  to  me  an  oblique  place. 
Should  there  be  other  summers,  would  you  perhaps 
come? 

I  found  you  were  gone,  by  accident,  as  I  find 
systems  are,  or  seasons  of  the  year,  and  obtain  no 
cause,  but  suppose  it  a  treason  of  progress  that  dis- 
solves as  it  goes.     Carlo  still  remained,  and  I  told 

him 

Best  gains  must  have  the  losses'  test, 
To  constitute  them  gains. 

My  shaggy  ally  assented. 

Perhaps  death  gave  me  awe  for  friends,  striking 

sharp  and  early,  for  I  held  them  since  in  a  brittle 

love,  of  more  alarm  than  peace.     I  trust  you  may 

pass  the  limit  of  war;  and  though  not  reared  to 

prayer,  when  service  is  had  in  church  for  our  arms, 

I  include  yourself.  ...  I  was  thinking  to-day,  as  I 
VOL.  n. — 6 


1 


3IO  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DIOTINSON  [1864 

noticed,  that  the  '  supernatural '  was  only  the  natural 

disclosed. 

Not  *  Revelation '  't  is  that  waits. 
But  our  unfurnished  eyes. 

But  I  fear  I  detain  you.    Should  you,  before  this 
reaches  you,  experience  Immortality,  who  will  in- 
J    form  me  of  the  exchange  ?    Could  you,  with  honor, 
/     avoid  death,  I  entreat  you,  sir.    It  would  bereave 

Your  Gnome. 

I  trust  the  Procession  of  Flowers  was  not  a 
premonition. 

Of  this  curious  letter  Colonel  Higginson 
wrote :  *  Mr  Howells  reminds  me  that  Sweden- 
borg  somewhere  has  an  image  akin  to  her 
"  oblique  place,"  where  he  symbolizes  evil  as 
simply  an  oblique  angle.' 

In  the  summer  of  1863  Colonel  Higginson 
was  wounded ;  in  September  of  the  same  year 
began  Emily's  trouble  with  her  eyes,  frequently 
referred  to.  In  the  April  following  she  went 
to  Boston,  —  her  mention  of  Hawthorne's  death 
(May,  1864)  of  itself  placing  the  date:  — 

[Summer,  1864.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  Are  you  in  danger?  I  did  not 
know  that  you  were  hurt.  Will  you  tell  me  more? 
Mr  Hawthorne  died. 

I  was  ill  since  September,  and  since  April  in  Bos- 


1865]  TO  MR  T.    W,  HIGGINSON  3 1 1 

ton  for  a  physician's  care.  He  does  not  let  me  go, 
yet  I  work  in  my  prison,  and  make  guests  for  myself. 

Carlo  did  not  come,  because  that  he  would  die  in 
jail ;  and  the  mountains  I  could  not  hold  now,  so  I 
brought  but  the  gods. 

I  wish  to  see  you  more  than  before  I  failed.  Will 
you  tell  me  your  health  ?  I  am  surprised  and  anx- 
ious since  receiving  your  note. 

The  only  news  I  know 
Is  bulletins  all  day 
From  Immortality. 

Can  you  render  my  pencil?  The  physician  has 
taken  away  ray  pen.  I  enclose  the  address  from  a 
letter,  lest  my  figures  fail. 

Klnowledge   of  your   recovery  would    excel   my 

own. 

E.  Dickinson. 

[1865.] 

Amherst. 

Dear  Friend,  —  You  were  so  generous  to  me, 
that  if  possible  I  offended  you,  I  could  not  too 
deeply  apologize. 

To  doubt  my  high  behavior  is  a  new  pain.  1  could 
be  honorable  no  more,  till  I  asked  you  about  it.  I 
know  not  what  to  deem  myself — yesterday  'your 
scholar,*  but  might  I  be  the  one  you  to-night  for- 
gave, 'tis  a  better  honor.  Mine  is  but  just  the 
thief  s  request. 

Please,  sir,  hear 

'  Barabbas.* 


312  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1868 


The  possibility  to  pass 
Without  a  moment's  bell 
\  Into  conjecture's  presence, 

I  Is  like  a  face  of  steel 

{  That  suddenly  looks  into  ours 

f  With  a  metallic  grin ; 

j'  The  cordiality  of  Death 

j  Who  drills  his  welcome  in. 


[1868.] 

Amherst. 

Dear  Friend,  —  Whom  my  dog  understood  could 
not  elude  others. 

I  should  be  so  glad  to  see  you,  but  think  it  an 
apparitional  pleasure,  not  to  be  fulfilled.  I  am  un- 
certain of  Boston. 

I  had  promised  to  visit  my  physician  for  a  few 
days  in  May,  but  father  objects  because  he  is  in  the 
habit  of  me. 

Is  it  more  far  to  Amherst  ? 

You  will  find  a  minute  host,  but  a  spacious 
welcome.  .  .  . 

If  I  still  entreat  you  to  teach  me,  are  you  much 
displeased?  I  will  be  patient,  constant,  never  re- 
ject your  knife,  and  should  my  slowness  goad  you, 
you  knew  before  myself  that 

Except  the  smaller  size 
No  lives  are  round. 
These  hurry  to  a  sphere 
And  show  and  end. 
The  larger  slower  grow 
And  later  hang ; 
The  summers  of  Hesperides 
Are  long. 


i868]  TO  MR   T.    W,  HIGGINSON  313 

[1868.] 

Amherst.   ,. 

Dear  Friend,  —  A  letter  always  feels  to  me  like  ] 
Immortality  because  it  is  the  mind  alone  without  / 
corporeal  friend.  Indebted  in  our  talk  to  attitude 
and  accent,  there  seems  a  spectral  power  in  thought 
that  walks  alone.  I  would  like  to  thank  you  for 
your  great  kindness,  but  never  try  to  lift  the  words 
which  I  cannot  hold. 

Should  you  come  to  Amherst,  I  might  then  suc- 
ceed, though  gratitude  is  the  timid  wealth  of  those 
who  have  nothing.  I  am  sure  that  you  speak  the 
truth,  because  the  noble  do,  but  your  letters  always 
surprise  me. 

My  life  has  been  too  simple  and  stem  to  embarrass 
any.     '  Seen  of  angels,*  scarcely  my  responsibility. 

It  is  difficult  not  to  be  fictitious  in  so  fair  a  place, 
but  tests'  severe  repairs  are  permitted  all. 

When  a  little  girl  I  remember  hearing  that  re- 
markable passage  and  preferring  the  'power,*  not 
knowing  at  the  time  that  *  kingdom  *  and  '  glory  * 
were  included. 

You  noticed  my  dwelling  alone.  To  an  emigrant, 
country  is  idle  except  it  be  his  own.  You  speak 
kindly  of  seeing  me ;  could  it  please  your  conven- 
ience to  come  so  far  as  Amherst,  I  should  be  very 
glad,  but  I  do  not  cross  my  father's  ground  to  any 
house  or  town. 

Of  our  greatest  acts  we  are  ignorant.  You  were 
not  aware  that  you  saved  my  life.     To  thank  you  in 


314  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1870 

person  has  been  since  then  one  of  my  few  requests. 
.  .  .  You  will  excuse  each  that  I  say,  because  no 
one  taught  me. 

[August,  1870.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  will  be  at  home  and  glad. 
I  think  you  said  the  15  th.    The  incredible  never 
surprises  us,  because  it  is  the  incredible. 

£.  Dickinson. 

Of  his  meeting  Emily  Dickinson  in  her  own 
home,  and  of  his  first  impressions  of  her, 
Colonel  Higginson  has  told  in  the  pages  of 
T/ie  Atlantic, 

Withdrawing  more  and  more  constantly  from 
accumulated  humanity,  no  thought  of  the  pos- 
sibility of  a  lack  of  congenial  occupation  ever 
crossed  her  mind.  During  their  first  interview, 
indeed,  Colonel  Higginson  asked  her  '  if  she 
never  felt  any  want  of  employment,  not  going 
oflf  the  grounds,  and  rarely  seeing  a  visitor; '  to 
which  she  replied,  *  I  never  thought  of  con- 
ceiving that  I  could  ever  have  the  slightest 
approach  to  such  a  want  in  all  future  time.' 

Among  the  strong  and  remarkable  things 
she  said  to  him  are  several  sentences  which 
it  seems  not  irrelevant  to  insert  here :  -* 

'  Is  it  oblivion  or  absorption  when  things  pass 
from  our  minds?' 


1870]  TO  MR  T.  W.  HIGGINSON  315 

'Truth  is  such  a  rare  thing,  it  is  delightful  to 
tell  it.' 

'  I  find  ecstasy  in  living ;  the  mere  sense  of  living 
is  joy  enough/ 

One  or  two  others  Colonel  Higginson  has 
called  '  the  very  wantonness  of  over-state- 
ment/ as,  — 

*  How  do  most  people  live  without  any  thoughts  ? 
There  are  many  people  in  the  world,  —  you  must 
have  noticed  them  in  the  street,  —  how  do  they 
live?  How  do  they  get  strength  to  put  on  their 
clothes  in  the  morning?* 

And  this,  *  a  crowning  extravaganza,'  — 

*  If  I  read  a  book  and  it  makes  my  whole  body 
so  cold  no  fire  can  ever  warm  me,  I  know  that  is 
poetry.  If  I  feel  physically  as  if  the  top  of  my 
head  were  taken  off,  I  know  that  is  poetry.  These 
are  the  only  ways  I  know  it.  Is  there  any  other 
way?* 

After  the  visit  she  wrote :  — 

[August,  1870] 

Enough  is  so  vast  a  sweetness,  I  suppose  it  never 
occurs,  only  pathetic  counterfeits. 

Fabulous  to  me  as  the  men  of  the  Revelations 
who  '  shall  not  hunger  any  more.'  Even  the  pos- 
sible has  its  insoluble  particle. 


3l6  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON         [1871 

After  you  went,  I  took  Macbeth  and  turned  to 
'Bimam  Wood.*  Came  twice  'to  Dunsinane.'  I 
thought  and  went  about  my  work.  .  .  . 

The  vein  cannot  thank  the  artery,  but  her  solemn 
indebtedness  to  him,  even  the  stolidest  admit,  and 
so  of  me  who  try,  whose  effort  leaves  no  sound. 

You  ask  great  questions  accidentally.  To  answer 
them  would  be  events.     I  trust  that  you  are  safe. 

1  ask  yoi;  ^  forgive  me  for  all  the  ignorance  I  had. 
1  find  no  nomination  sweet  as  your  low  opinion. 

Speak,  if  but  to  blame  your  obedient  child. 

You  told  me  of  Mrs  LowelPs  poems.  Would  you 
tell  me  where  I  could  find  them,  or  are  they  not  for 
sight?  An  article  of  yours,  too,  perhaps  the  only 
one  you  wrote  that  I  never  knew.  It  was  about  a 
'  Latch.*     Are  you  willing  to  tell  me?  ^ 

If  I  ask  too  much,  you  could  please  refuse. 
Shortness  to  live  has  made  me  bold. 

Abroad  is  close  to-night  and  I  have  but  to  lift 
my  hands  to  touch  the  '  Heights  of  Abraham.' 

Dickinson. 

[Winter,  1871.] 

To  live  is  so  startling,  it  leaves  but  little  room  for 
other  occupations,  though  friends  are,  if  possible, 
an  event  more  fair. 

I  am  happy  you  have  the  travel  you  so  long  de- 
sire, and  chastened  that  my  master  met  neither 
accident  nor  Death. 

^  Perhaps  A  Shadow, 


1874]  TO  MR  T,   W,  HIGGINSON  317 

Our  own  possessions,  though  our  own,  'tis  well 
to  hoard  anew,  remembering  the  dimensions  of  pos- 
sibility. I  often  saw  your  name  in  iUustrious  men- 
tion, and  envied  an  occasion  so  abstinent  to  me. 
Thank  you  for  having  been  to  Amherst.  Could  you 
come  again  that  would  be  far  better,  though  the 
finest  wish  is  the  futile  one. 

When  I  saw  you  last,  it  was  mighty  summer  — 
now  the  grass  is  glass,  and  the  meadov  tucco,  and 
*  still  waters '  in  the  pool  where  the  frog  drinks. 

These  beha!viors  of  the  year  hurt  almost  like 
music,  shifting  when  it  ease  us  most.  Thank  you 
for  the  *  lesson.* 

I  will  study  it,  though  hitherto,  — 

Menagerie  to  me 
My  neighbor  be. 

Your  Scholar. 

Her  father's  death  (June  16)  swept  away  all 
her  landmarks.     To  this  friend  she  wrote :  — 

[July,  1874] 

The  last  afternoon  that  my  father  lived,  though 
with  no  premonition,  I  preferred  to  be  with  him, 
and  invented  an  absence  for  mother,  Vinnie  being 
asleep.  He  seemed  peculiarly  pleased,  as  I  oftenest 
stayed  with  myself;  and  remarked,  as  the  afternoon 
withdrew,  he  *  would  like  it  to  not  end.' 

His  pleasure  almost  embarrassed  me,  and  my 
brother    coming,   I   suggested    they    walk.      Next 


3l8  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1874 

morning  I  woke  him  for  the  train,  and  saw  him  no 
more. 

His  heart  was  pure  and  terrible,  and  I  think  no 
other  like  it  exists. 

I  am  glad  there  is  Immortality,  but  would  have 
tested  it  myself,  before  intrusting  him.  Mr  Bowles 
was  with  us.  With  that  exception,  I  saw  none.  I 
have  wished  for  you,  since  my  father  died,  and  had 
you  an  hour  unengrossed,  it  would  be  almost  price- 
less. Thank  you  for  each  kindness.  .  .  .  Your 
beautiful  hymn,  was  it  not  prophetfc?  It  has  as- 
sisted that  pause  of  space  which  I  call '  father/ 

[August,  1874] 

When  I  think  of  my  father's  lonely  life  and  lone- 
lier death,  there  is  this  redress,  — 

■  Take  all  away ; 

j  The  only  thing  worth  larceny 

{  Is  left  —  the  Immortality. 

My  earliest  friend  wrote  me  the  week  before  he 

died,  '  If  I  live,  I  will  go  to  Amherst ;  if  I  die,  I 

certainly  will.' 

Is  your  house  deeper  off? 

Your  Scholar. 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  find  you  with  dusk,  for  day  is 
tired,  and  lays  her  antediluvian  cheek  to  the  hill 
Hke  a  child. 

Nature  confides  now. 


i875]  TO  MR  T,  W.  HIGGINSON  319 

I  hope  you  are  jo)rful  frequently,  these  beloved 
days,  and  the  health  of  your  friend  bolder. 

I  remember  her  with  my  blossoms  and  wish  they 
were  hers 

Whose  pink  career  may  have  a  close 
Portentous  as  our  own,  who  knows  ? 
To  imitate  these  neighbors  fleet, 
In  awe  and  innocence,  were  meet. 

Summer  is  so  kind  1  had  hoped  you  might  come. 
Since  my  father's  d)dng,  everything  sacred  enlarged 
so  it  was  dim  to  own.  When  a  few  years  old,  I  was 
taken  to  a  funeral  which  I  now  know  was  of  peculiar 
distress,  and  the  clergyman  asked,  '  Is  the  arm  of 
the  Lord  shortened,  that  it  cannot  save  ? ' 

He  italicised  the  '  cannot.'  1  mistook  the  accent 
for  a  doubt  of  Immortality,  and  not  daring  to  ask,  it 
besets  me  still,  though  we  know  that  the  mind  of 
the  heart  must  live  if  its  clerical  part  do  not.  Would 
you  explain  it  to  me  ?  ...  It  comforts  an  instinct  if 
another  have  felt  it  too.  I  was  re-reading  your 
Decoration.    You  may  have  forgotten  it. 

[June,  1875.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  Mother  was  paralyzed  Tuesday, 

a  year  from  the   evening   father  died.     I  thought 

perhaps  you  would  care. 

Your  Scholar. 

A  death-blow  is  a  life-blow  to  some 
Who,  till  they  died,  did  not  alive  become ; 
Who,  had  they  lived,  had  died,  but  when  / 

They  died,  vitality  begun.  / 


320  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1875 

[1875J 

Dear  Friend,  —  The  flower  was  jasmine.  I  am 
glad  if  it  pleased  your  friend.  It  is  next  dearest  to 
daphne,  except  wild-flowers  —  those  are  dearer. 

1  have  a  friend  in  Dresden,  who  thinks  the  love 
of  the  field  a  misplaced  affection  —  and  says  he  will 
send  me  a  meadow  that  is  better  than  summer's. 
If  he  does,  I  will  send  it  to  you. 

I  have  read  nothing  of  Tourgu^neffs,  but  thank 
you  for  telling  me  —  and  will  seek  him  immediately. 
I  did  not  read  Mr  Miller  because  I  could  not  care 
about  him. 

Mrs  Hunt's  poems  are  stronger  than  any  written 
by  women  since  Mrs  Browning,  with  the  exception 
of  Mrs  Lewes's ;  but  truth  like  ancestors*  brocades  ^ 
can  stand  alone.     You  speak  of  Men  and  Women, 
That  is  a  broad  book. 

Bells  and  Pomegranates  I  never  saw,  but  have 
Mrs  Browning's  endorsement.     While  Shakespeare  * 
remains,  literature  is  firm. 

An  insect  cannot  run  away  with  Achilles's  head. 
Thank  you  for  having  written  the  Atlantic  Essays. 
They  are  a  fine  joy,  though  to  possess  the  in- 
gredient for  congratulation  renders  congratulation 
superfluous. 

Dear  friend,  I  trust  you  as  you  ask.  If  I  exceed 
permission,  excuse  the  bleak  simplicity  that  knew 
no  tutor  but  the  north.     Would  you  but  guide 

Dickinson? 


1876]  TO  MR   T,  W,  HIGGINSON  32 1 

[1875] 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  am  sorry  your  brother  is  dead. 
I  fear  he  was  dear  to  you.  I  should  be  glad  to 
know  you  were  painlessly  grieved. 

Of  Heaven  above  the  firmest  proof 
We  fundamental  know  — 
Except  for  its  marauding  hand 
It  had  been  heaven  below. 

Dickinson. 

As  already  shown,  Emily  had  effectively  re- 
sisted all  importunity  to  publish.  Even  the  elo- 
quent pleading  of  her  long-time  friend  *H.  H.' 
was  of  no  avail ;  but  apparently  reinforcement 
in  her  decision  was  sometimes  sought:  — 

[Early  in  1876] 

Dear  Friend,  —  Are  you  willing  to  tell  me  what 
is  right  ?  Mrs  Jackson,  of  Colorado,  was  with 
me  a  few  moments  this  week,  and  wished  me  to 
write  for  this.*  I  told  her  I  was  unwilling,  and 
she  asked  me  why?  I  said  I  was  incapable,  and 
she  seemed  not  to  believe  me  and  asked  me  not 
to  decide  for  a  few  days.  Meantime,  she  would 
write  to  me.  She  was  so  sweetly  noble,  I  would 
regret  to  estrange  her,  and  if  you  would  be  willing 
to  give  me  a  note  saying  you  disapproved  it  and 

^  A  circular  of  the  No  Name  Series  was  enclosed. 


322  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1876 

thought  me  unfit,  she  would  believe  you.  I  am 
sorry  to  flee  so  often  to  my  safest  friend,  but  hope 
he  permits  me. 

[Acknowledging  a  photograph,  1876.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  Except  your  coming  I  know  no 
gift  so  great,  and  in  one  extent  it  exceeds  that,  —  it 
is  permanent. 

Your  face  is  more  joyful  when  you  speak,  and  I 
miss  an  almost  arrogant  look  that  at  times  haunts 
you,  but  with  that  exception,  it  is  so  real  I  could 
think  it  you. 

Thank  you  with  delight,  and  please  to  thank  your 
friend  for  the  lovely  suggestion. 

I  hope  she  has  no  suffering  now. 

Was  it  Browning's  flower  that  *  ailed  till  evening '  ? 
I  shall  think  of  your  '  keeping  house '  at  night  when 
I  close  the  shutter  —  but  to  be  Mrs  Higginson's 
guest  is  the  boon  of  birds. 

Judge  Lord  was  with  us  a  few  days  since,  and 
told  me  that  the  joy  we  most  revere  we  profane  in 
taking.     I  wish  that  was  wrong. 

Mrs  Jackson  has  written.  It  was  not  stories  she 
asked  of  me.  But  may  I  tell  her  just  the  same  that 
you  don't  prefer  it?  Thank  you  if  I  may,  for  it 
almost  seems  sordid  to  refuse  from  myself  again. 

My  brother  and  sister  speak  of  you,  and  covet 
your  remembrance,  and  perhaps  you  will  not  reject 
my  own  to  Mrs  Higginson? 


1876]  TO  MR   T.   W.  HIGGINSON  323 

Summer  laid  her  supple  glove 
In  its  sylvan  drawer  — 
Wheresoe'er,  or  was  she 
The  demand  of  awe  ? 

Your  Scholar. 

[March,  1876.] 

,  .  .  But  two  had  mentioned  the  '  spring '  to  me 
—  yourself  and  the  Revelations,  'I,  Jesus,  have 
sent  mine  angel.* 

I  inferred  your  touch  in  the  papers  on  Lowell  and 
Emerson.  It  is  delicate  that  each  mind  is  itself, 
like  a  distinct  bird. 

I  was  lonely  there  was  an  'or '  in  that  beautiful 
'I  would  go  to  Amherst,'  though  grieved  for  its 
cause.  I  wish  your  friend  had  my  strength,  for  I 
don't  care  for  roving  —  she  perhaps  might,  though 
to  remain  with  you  is  journey. 

To  abstain  from  Daniel  Deronda  is  hard  —  you 
are  very  kind  to  be  willing.  ...  I  am  glad  Immor- 
tality pleased  you.  I  believed  it  would.  I  suppose 
even  God  Himself  could  not  withhold  that  now. 


To  disappear  enhances,  \ 

The  man  that  runs  away  | 

Is  tinctured  for  an  instant 
With  Immortality. 


But  yesterday  a  vagrant, 
To-day  in  memory  lain 
With  superstitious  value  — 
We  tamper  wilh  again. 


\ 


y 


324  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1876 

But '  never  *  far  as  honor 
Withdraws  the  worthless  thing. 
And  impotent  to  cherish 
We  hasten  to  adorn. 

Of  Death  the  sternest  function 
That  just  as  we  discern 
The  excellence  defies  us  — 
Securest  gathered  then 

The  fruit  perverse  to  plucking. 
But  leaning  to  the  sight 
With  the  ecstatic  limit 
Of  unobtained  delight. 

In  sending  a  volume  of  George  Eliot  to 
Mrs  Higginson,  Emily  wrote,  *  I  am  bringing 
you  a  little  granite  book  to  lean  on/ 

[Autumn,  1876.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  Thank  you  for  permission  to 
write  Mrs  Higginson.  I  hope  I  have  not  fatigued 
her  —  also  for  thinking  of  my  brother,  who  is  slowly 
better,  and  rides  for  an  hour,  kind  days. 

I  am  glad  if  I  did  as  you  would  like.  The  de- 
gradation to  displease  you,  1  hope  I  may  never 
incur. 

Often,  when  troubled  by  entreaty,  that  paragraph 
of  yours  has  saved  me  — '  Such  being  the  majesty  of 
the  art  you  presume  to  practise,  you  can  at  least 
take  time  before  dishonoring  it,'  and  Enobarbus  said, 
'  Leave  that  which  leaves  itself.* 

I  shall  look  with  joy  for  the  t*  little  book  *  because 


i877]  TO  MR  T.   W.  HIGGINSON  325 

it  is  yours,  though  I  seek  you  in  vain  in  the  maga- 
zines where  you  once  wrote.  I  recently  found  two 
papers  of  yours  that  were  unknown  to  me,  and  won- 
dered anew  at  your  withdrawing  thought  so  sought 
by  others. 

When  flowers  annually  died  and  I  was  a  child,  I 
used  to  read  Dr  Hitchcock's  book  on  the  Flowers 
of  North  America,     This  comforted  their  absence, 

assuring  me  they  lived. 

Your  Scholar. 

[1877.] 

Thank  you,  dear  friend,  for  my  *  New  Year,'  but 
did  you  not  confer  it  ?  Had  your  scholar  permis- 
sion to  fashion  yours,  it  were  perhaps  too  fair.  I 
always  ran  home  to  awe  when  a  child,  if  anything 
befell  me.  He  was  an  awful  mother,  but  I  liked 
him  better  than  none. 

There  remained  this  shelter  after  you  left  me  the 
other  day. 

Of  your  flitting  coming  it  is  fair  to  think,  like  the 
bee's  coup6,  vanishing  in  music. 

Would  you  with  the  bee  return. 
What  a  firm  of  noon  I 
Death  obtains  the  rose, 
But  the  news  of  dying  goes 
No  further  than  the  breeze. 

The  ear  is  the  last  face.  We  hear  after  we  see, 
which  to  tell  you  first  is  still  my  destiny. 

VOL.  II. — 7 


326  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1877 

Meeting  a  bird  this  morning,  I  began  to  flee. 
He  saw  it  and  sung. 

Presuming  on  that  lone  result. 

His  infinite  disdain, 

But  vanquished  him  with  my  defeat— 

T  was  victory  was  slain. 

I  shall  read  the  book. 
Thank  you  for  telling  me. 

[After  Colonel  Higginson  had  met  with  a  bereavement,  in 

1877.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  We  must  be  less  than  Death  to 
be  lessened  by  it,  for  nothing  is  irrevocable  but 
ourselves. 

I  am  glad  you  are  better.  I  had  feared  to  follow 
you,  lest  you  would  rather  be  lonely,  which  is  the 
will  of  sorrow ;  but  the  papers  had  spoken  of  you 
with  affectionate  deference,  and  to  know  you  were 
deeply  remembered  might  not  too  intrude. 

To  be  human  is  more  than  to  be  divine,  for  when 
Christ  was  divine  he  was  uncontented  till  he  had 
been  human. 

I  remember  nothing  so  strong  as  to  see  you.  •  •  • 

[1877.1 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  think  of  you  so  wholly  that  I 
cannot  resist  to  write  again,  to  ask  if  you  are  safe  ? 
Danger  is  not  at  first,  for  then  we  are  unconsciouSi 
but  in  the  after,  slower  days. 


1878]  TO  MR  T.  W,  HIGGINSON  327 

Do  not  try  to  be  saved,  but  let  redemption  find 
you,  as  it  certainly  will.  Love  is  its  own  rescue,  for 
we,  at  our  supremest,  are  but  its  trembling  emblems. 

Your  Scholar. 

After  an  interval  of  silence  came  this  letter, 
in  the  same  year :  — 

Must  I  lose  the  friend  that  saved  my  life  without 
inquiring  why?  Affection  gropes  through  drifts  of 
awe  for  his  tropic  door. 

That  every  bliss  we  know  or  guess  hourly  befall 
him,  is  his  scholar's  prayer. 

[January,  1878.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  felt  it  shelter  to  speak  to  you. 

My  brother  and  sister  are  with  Mr  Bowles,  who  is 
buried  this  afternoon. 

The  last  song  that  I  heard  —  that  was,  since  the 
birds  —  was,  '  He  leadeth  me,  he  leadeth  me ;  yea, 
though  I  walk  *  —  then  the  voices  stooped,  the  arch 
was  so  low. 

[Summer,  1878.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  When  you  wrote  you  would  come 
in  November,  it  would  please  me  it  were  November 
then  —  but  the  time  has  moved.  You  went  with 
the  coming  of  the  birds  —  they  will  go  with  your 
coming,  but  to  see  you  is  so  much  sweeter  than 
birds,  I  could  excuse  the  spring. 


328  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1878 

With  the  bloom  of  the  flower  your  friend  loved, 
I  have  wished  for  her,  but  God  cannot  discontinue 
Himself. 

Mr  Bowles  was  not  willing  to  die. 

When  you  have  lost  a  friend,  Master,  you  remem- 
ber you  could  not  begin  again,  because  there  was 
no  world.  I  have  thought  of  you  often  since  the 
darkness,  though  we  cannot  assist  another's  night. 

I  have  hoped  you  were  saved. 

That  those  have  immortality  with  whom  we  talked 
about  it,  makes  it  no  more  mighty  but  perhaps  more 
sudden.  .  .  . 

How  brittle  are  the  piers 
On  which  our  faith  doth  tread  — 
No  bridge  below  doth  totter  so, 
Yet  none  hath  such  a  crowd. 

It  is  as  old  as  God  — 
Indeed,  't  was  built  by  Him  — 
He  sent  His  son  to  test  the  plank. 
And  he  pronounced  it  firm. 

I  hope  you  have  been  well.  I  hope  your  rambles 
have  been  sweet,  and  your  reveries  spacious. 

To  have  seen  Stratford  on  Avon,  and  the  Dresden 
Madonna,  must  be  almost  peace. 

And  perhaps  you  have  spoken  with  George  Eliot. 
Will  you  'tell  me  about  it'?  Will  you  come  in 
November,  and  will  November  come,  or  is  this  the 
hope  that  opens  and  shuts,  like  the  eye  of  the  wax 
doll? 

Your  Scholar. 


i879]  TO  MR   T,   W.  HIGGINSON  329 

[In  acknowledgment  of  his  Short  Studies  0/ American  Authors , 

1879.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  Brabantio's  gift  was  not  more 
fair  than  yours,  though  I  trust  without  his  pathetic 
inscription,  '  Which  but  thou  hast  already,  with  all 
my  heart  I  would  keep  from  thee.* 

Of  Poe,  I  know  too  little  to  think  —  Hawthorne 
appalls  —  entices. 

Mrs  Jackson  soars  to  your  estimate  lawfully  as  a 
bird,  but  of  Howells  and  James,  one  hesitates.  Your 
relentless  music  dooms  as  it  redeems. 

Remorse  for  the  brevity  of  a  book  is  a  rare  emo- 
tion, though  fair  as  Lowell's  *  sweet  despair '  in  the 
*  slipper  hymn.' 

One  thing  of  it  we  borrow 
And  promise  to  return. 
The  booty  and  the  sorrow 
Its  sweetness  to  have  known. 
One  thing  of  it  we  covet  — 
The  power  to  forget, 
The  anguish  of  the  avarice 
Defrays  the  dross  of  it 

Had  I  tried  before  reading  your  gift  to  thank  you, 
it  had  perhaps  been  possible,  but  I  waited,  and  now 
it  disables  my  lips. 

Magic,  as  it  electrifies,  also  makes  decrepit.  Thank 
you  for  thinking  of  me. 

Your  Scholar. 


330  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1880 

[1880.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  You  were  once  so  kind  as  to  say 
you  would  advise  me.     Could  I  ask  it  now? 

I  have  promised  three  hymns  to  a  charity,  but 
without  your  approval  could  not  give  them. 

They  are  short,  and  1  could  write  them  quite 
plainly,  and  if  you  felt  it  convenient  to  tell  me  if 
they  were  faithful,  I  should  be  very  grateful,  though 
if  public  cares  too  far  fatigue  you,  please  deny 

Your  Scholar. 

[1880.] 

Dear  Friend, — Thank  you  for  the  advice.  I 
shall  implicitly  follow  it. 

The  one  who  asked  me  for  the  lines  I  had  never 
seen. 

He  spoke  of  '  a  charity.'  I  refused,  but  did  not 
inquire.  He  again  earnestly  urged,  on  the  ground 
that  in  that  way  I  might  '  aid  unfortunate  children.' 
The  name  of  *  child  *  was  a  snare  to  me,  and  I  hesi- 
tated, choosing  my  most  rudimentary,  and  without 
criterion. 

I  inquired  of  you.  You  can  scarcely  estimate 
the  opinion  to  one  utterly  guideless.  Again  thank 
you. 

Your  Scholar. 

[Early  Summer,  1880.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  was  touchingly  reminded  of 
[a  child  who  had  died]  this  morning  by  an  Indian 


1884]  TO  MR  T.   W.  HIGGINSON  33 1 

woman  with  gay  baskets  and  a  dazzling  baby,  at  the 
kitchen  door.  Her  little  boy  '  once  died/  she  said, 
death  to  her  dispelling  him.  I  asked  her  what  the 
baby  liked,  and  she  said  'to  step.*  The  prairie 
before  the  door  was  gay  with  flowers  of  hay,  and  I 
led  her  in.  She  argued  with  the  birds,  she  leaned 
on  clover  walls  and  they  fell,  and  dropped  her.&lt; 
With  jargon  sweeter  than  a  bell,  she  grappled 
buttercups,  and  they  sank  together,  the  buttercups 
the  heaviest.  What  sweetest  use  of  days  !  *T  was 
noting  some  such  scene  made  Vaughan  humbly 
say,— 

'My  days  that  are  at  best  but  dim  and  hoary.' 

I  think  it  was  Vaughan.  .  .  . 

[1884.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  May  I  ask  the  delight  in  ad- 
vance, of  sending  you  the  Life  of  Mrs  Cross  by  her 
husband,  which  the  papers  promise  for  publication  ? 

I  feared  some  other  pupil  might  usurp  my 
privilege. 

Emblem  is  immeasurable  —  that  is  why  it  is  bet- 
ter than  fulfilment,  which  can  be  drained. 


CHAPTER    VIII 

To  Mr  Perez  D.  Cowan,  Miss  Maria  Whitney^ 
Mr  Bowles,  Mr  J.  D.  Clark,  and  Mr  C.  H. 
Clark 

MR  COWAN  graduated  at  Amherst  Col- 
lege in  1866,  and  'Peter'  was  Emily 
Dickinson's  especial  appellation  for  this  favor- 
ite cousin.  The  first  letter  was  written  upon 
the  occasion  of  his  marriage  to  Miss  Margaret 
Elizabeth  Rhea. 

To  the  Rev,  Perez  D.  Cowan 
[October  26,  1870.] 

Dear  Peter,  —  It  is  indeed  sweet  news.  I  am 
proud  of  your  happiness.  To  Peter,  and  Peter's, 
let  me  give  both  hands.  Delight  has  no  competi- 
tor, so  it  is  always  most. 

*  Maggie '  is  a  warm  name. 

I  shall  like  to  take  it. 

Home  is  the  definition  of  God. 

EBm«Y. 


i87o]  TO  MR  PEREZ  D,  COWAN  333 

To  the  Same 

It  is  long  since  I  knew  of  you,  Peter,  and  much 
may  have  happened  to  both ;  but  that  is  the  rarest 
book,  which,  opened  at  whatever  page,  equally  en- 
chants us. 

1  hope  that  you  have  power,  and  as  much  of  peace 
as  in  our  deep  existence  may  be  possible. 

To  multiply  the  harbors  does  not  reduce  the  sea. 

We  learn,  through  cousin  Montague,  that  you  have 
lost  your  sister  through  that  sweeter  loss  which  we 
call  gain. 

I  am  glad  she  is  glad. 

Her  early  pain  had  seemed  to  me  peculiarly  cruel. 

Tell  her  how  tenderly  we  are  pleased. 

Recall  me  too  to  your  other  sisters,  who  though 
they  may  have  mislaid  me,  I  can  always  find ;  and 
include  me  to  your  sweet  wife.  We  are  daily 
reminded  of  you  by  the  clergyman,  Mr  Jenkins, 
whom  you  strongly  resemble. 

Thank  you  for  the  paper.  It  is  homelike  to 
know  where  you  are. 

We  can  almost  hear  you  announce  the  text,  when 
the  air  is  clear ;  and  how  social  if  you  should  preach 
us  a  note  some  Sunday  in  recess  I 

Emily. 


334  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1880 

To  the  Same 

[After  the  death  of  Mr  Cowan's  little  daughter  Margie.] 

[November  8, 1879.] 

Will  it  comfort  my  grieved  cousin  to  know  that 
Emily  and  Vinnie  are  among  the  ones  this  moment 
thinking  of  him  with  peculiar  tenderness,  and  is  his 
sweet  wife  too  faint  to  remember  to  Whom  her  loved 
one  is  consigned? 

'  Come  unto  me '  could  not  alarm  those  minute 
feet  —  how  sweet  to  remember. 

If  you  feel  able,  write  a  few  words ;  if  you  do  not 

—  remember  forgetting  is  a  guile  unknown  to  your 

faithful  cousin 

Emily. 

To  the  Same 

[Upon  receiving  an  account  of  little  Margie's  life  and  death.] 

[October,  1880.] 

Dear  Cousin,  —  The  sweet  book  found  me  on 
my  pillow,  where  I  was  detained,  or  I  should  have 
thanked  you  immediately. 

The  little  creature  must  have  been  priceless  — 
yours  and  not  yours  —  how  hallowed  ! 

It  may  have  been  she  came  to  show  you  Immor- 
tality.   Her  startling  little  flight  would  imply  she  did. 

May  I  remind  you  what  Paul  said,  or  do  you  think 
of  nothing  else,  these  October  nights,  without  her 
crib  to  visit? 


i88o]  TO  MISS  MARIA   WHITNEY  335 

The  little  furniture  of  loss  has  lips  of  dirks  to  stab 
us.  I  hope  Heaven  is  warm,  there  are  so  many 
barefoot  ones.  I  hope  it  is  near  —  the  little  tourist 
was  so  small.  I  hope  it  is  not  so  unlike  earth  that 
we  shall  miss  the  peculiar  form  —  the  mould  of  the 
bird.  '  And  with  what  body  do  they  come  ?  *  Then 
they  do  come  !  Rejoice  !  What  door?  What  hour? 
Run,  run,  my  soul  I     Illuminate  the  house  ! 

'  Body !  *  then  real,  —  a  face  and  eyes,  —  to  know 
that  it  is  them  !  Paul  knew  the  Man  that  knew  the 
news,  He  passed  through  Bethlehem. 

With  love  for  you,  and  your  sweet  wife, '  whom 

seeing  not,  we  *  trust. 

Cousin  Emh-y. 

To  Miss  Maria  Whitney 

How  well  I  know  her  not 

Whom  not  to  know  has  been 

A  bounty  in  prospective,  now 

Next  door  to  mine  the  pain, 

Emily. 

The  handwriting  of  this  first  little  stanza  sent 
to  Miss  Whitney  is  that  of  the  early  middle 
period,  and  is  too  indefinite  to  be  safely  dated ; 
but  before  the  next  letter,  a  long  interval  seems 
to  have  elapsed. 


336  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1878 

To  the  Same 

[1877.1 

Vinnie  and  her  sister  thank  Miss  Whitney  for  the 
delicate  kindness,  and  remember  her  with  peculiar 
love  these  acuter  days.  .  .  . 

I  fear  we  think  too  lightly  of  the  gift  of  mortality, 

which,  too  gigantic  to  comprehend,  certainly  cannot 

be  estimated. 

E.  Dickinson. 

To  the  Same 

[1878] 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  have  thought  of  you  often  since 
the  darkness,  —  though  we  cannot  assist  another's 
night.  I  have  hoped  you  were  saved.  That  he  has 
received  Immortality  who  so  often  conferred  it, 
invests  it  with  a  more  sudden  charm.  .  .  . 

I  hope  you  have  the  power  of  hope,  and  that 
every  bliss  we  know  or  guess  hourly  befalls  you. 

E.  Dickinson. 

To  the  Same 

...  To  relieve  the  irreparable  degrades  it. 

Brabantio's  resignation  is  the  only  one  — '  I  here 
do  give  thee  that  with  all  my  heart,  which  but  thou 
hast  already,  with  all  my  heart  I  would  keep  from 
thee.' 

Emily. 


1878]  TO  MISS  MARIA   WHITNEY  337 

To  the  Same 
[1878.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  am  constantly  more  astonished 
that  the  body  contains  the  spirit  —  except  for  over- 
mastering work  it  could  not  be  borne. 

I  shall  miss  saying  to  Vinnie  when  we  hear  the 
Northampton  bell  —  as  in  subtle  states  of  the  west 
we  do  —  *  Miss  Whitney  is  going  to  church/  though 
must  not  everjnvhere  be  church  to  hearts  that  have, 
or  have  had,  a  friend  ? 

Could  that  sweet  darkness  where  they  dwell 

Be  once  disclosed  to  us, 
The  clamor  for  their  loveliness 

Would  burst  the  loneliness. 

I  trust  you  may  have  the  dearest  summer  possible 
to  loss.  One  sweet,  sweet  more,  one  liquid  more, 
of  that  Arabian  presence  ! 

You  spoke  very  sweetly  to  both  of  us,  and  your 
sewing  and  recollecting  is  a  haunting  picture,  a 
sweet,  spectral  protection.  Your  name  is  taken  as 
tenderly  as  the  names  of  our  birds,  or  the  flower, 
for  some  mysterious  cause,  sundered  from  its 
dew.  •  ,  . 

In  a  brief  memoir  of  Parepa,  in  which  she  was 
likened  to  a  rose,  —  *  thomless  until  she  died,*  some 
bereaved  one  added.  To  miss  him  is  his  only  stab, 
but  that  he  never  gave  ! 

A  word  from  you  would  be  sacred.  Emh-y. 

.  ,  ,  The  crucifix  requires  no  glove. 


I 


338  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1878 


To  the  Same 

Intrusiveness  of  flowers  is  brooked  by  even 
troubled   hearts. 

They  enter  and  then  knock  —  then  chide  their 
ruthless  sweetness,  and  then  remain  forgiven. 

May  these  molest  as  fondly ! 

To  the  Same 

Than  Heaven  more  remote, 
For  Heaven  is  the  root, 
But  these  the  flitted  seed, 
More  flown  indeed 
Than  ones  that  never  were. 
Or  those  that  hide,  and  are. 

What  madness,  by  their  side, 
A  vision  to  provide 
Of  future  days 
They  cannot  praise. 

My  soul,  to  find  them,  come. 
They  cannot  call,  they  *re  dumb, 
Nor  prove,  nor  woo, 
But  that  they  have  abode 
Is  absolute  as  God, 
And  instant,  too. 

EMn.Y. 


/ 


i8793  TO  MISS  MARIA    WHITNEY  339 

■II.IJ.LJJL  i  JL..].J  ■  -  -  ■■  LJI  !»■ »!■  ^W^—— ■  11  IM     I        ■ 

To  the  Same 

The  face  in  evanescence  lain  / 

Is  more  distinct  than  ours, 

And  ours,  considered  for  its  sake, 

As  capsules  are  for  flowers. 

Emily. 

To  the  Same 

[1879.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  Your  touching  suggestion  .  .  . 
is  a  tender  permission.  .  .  . 

We  cannot  believe  for  each  other  —  thought  is 
too  sacred  a  despot,  but  I  hope  that  God,  in*  what- 
ever form,  is  true  to  our  friend.  .  .  .  Consciousness 
is  the  only  home  of  which  we  now  know.  That 
sunny  adverb  had  been  enough,  were  it  not  fore- 
closed. 

When  not  inconvenient  to  your  heart,  please 
remember  us,  and  let  us  help  you  carry  it,  if  you 
grow  tired.  Though  we  are  each  unknown  to  our- 
self  and  each  other,  *t  is  not  what  well  conferred  it, 
the  dying  soldier  asks,  it  is  only  the  water. 

We  knew  not  that  we  were  to  live, 
Nor  when  we  are  to  die  j 

Our  ignorance  our  cuirass  is ;  j 

We  wear  mortality  j 

As  lightly  as  an  option  gown 
Till  asked  to  take  it  off. 
By  His  intrusion  God  is  known  —         \ 
It  is  the  same  with  life.  \ 

Emily. 


340  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON         [1883 

To  the  Same 

[November,  1882.] 

Titesday, 

Sweet  Friend,  —  Our  mother  ceased.    While  we 

bear  her  dear  form  through  the  wilderness,  I  am 

sure  you  are  with  us. 

Emily. 

To  the  Same 

[1883.3 

Dear  Friend,  —  The  guilt  of  having  sent  the 
note  had  so  much  oppressed  me  that  I  hardly  dared 
to  read  the  reply,  and  delayed  my  heart  almost  to 
its  stifling,  sure  you  would  never  receive  us  again. 
To  come  unto  our  own  and  our  own  fail  to  receive 
us,  is  a  sere  response. 

I  hope  you  may  forgive  us. 

All  is  faint  indeed  without  our  vanished  mother, 
who  achieved  in  sweetness  what  she  lost  in  strength, 
though  grief  of  wonder  at  her  fate  made  the  winter 
short,  and  each  night  I  reach  finds  my  lungs  more 
breathless,  seeking  what  it  means. 

To  the  bright  east  she  flies, 
Brothers  of  Paradise 
Remit  her  home. 
Without  a  change  of  wings, 
Or  Love's  convenient  things. 
Enticed  to  come. 

Fashioning  what  she  is, 
Fathoming  what  she  was, 


1883]  TO  MISS  MARIA   WHITNEY  34 1 

We  deem  we  dream  — 
And  that  dissolves  the  days 
Through  which  existence  strays 
Homeless  at  home. 

The  sunshine  almost  speaks,  this  morning,  redoubling 
tlie  division,  and  Paul's  remark  grows  graphic,  '  the 
weight  of  glory.* 

I  am  glad  you  have  an  hour  for  books,  those  en- 
thralling friends,  the  immortalities,  perhaps,  each 
may  pre-receive.    *  And  I  saw  the  Heavens  opened.' 

I  hope  that  nothing  pains  you  except  the  pang  of 

life,  sweeter  to  bear  than  to  omit. 

With  love  and  wonder, 

Emily. 

To  the  Same 
[1883?] 

Dear  Friend,  —  Is  not  an  absent  friend  as  m)rs- 
terious  as  a  bulb  in  the  ground,  and  is  not  a  bulb  the 
most  captivating  floral  form?  Must  it  not  have 
enthralled  the  Bible,  if  we  may  infer  from  its  selec- 
tion?    *  The  lily  of  the  field ! ' 

I  never  pass  one  without  being  chagrined  for 
Solomon,  and  so  in  love  with  *  the  lily  *  anew,  that 
were  I  sure  no  one  saw  me,  I  might  make  those 
advances  of  which  in  after  life  I  should  repent 

The  apple-blossoms  were  slightly  disheartened, 
yesterday,  by  a  snow-storm,  but  the  birds  encour- 
aged them  all  that  they  could  —  and  how  fortunate 
that  the  little  ones  had  come  to  cheer  their  damask 
brethren ! 

VOL.  II. — 8 


342  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1883 

You  spoke  of  coming  *  with  the  apple-blossoms  * 
—  which  occasioned  our  solicitude. 

The  ravenousness  of  fondness  is  best  disclosed  by 
children.  .  ,  . 

Is  there  not  a  sweet  wolf  witnin  us  that  demands 
its  food? 

I  can  easily  imagine  your  fondness  for  the  little 
life  so  mysteriously  committed  to  your  care.  The 
bird  that  asks  our  crumb  has  a  plaintive  distinction. 
I  rejoice  that  it  was  possible  for  you  to  be  with  it,  for 
I  think  the  early  spiritual  influences  about  a  child 
are  more  hallowing  than  we  know.  The  angel  begins 
in  the  morning  in  every  human  life.  How  small  the 
furniture  of  bliss  !     How  scant  the  heavenly  fabric  ! 

No  ladder  needs  the  bird  but  skies 

To  situate  its  wings, 

Nor  any  leader's  grim  baton 

Arraigns  it  as  it  sings. 

The  implements  of  bliss  are  few  — 

As  Jesus  says  of  ffinif 

*  Come  unto  me  *  the  moiety 

That  wafts  the  cherubim. 


Emily. 


To  the  Same 


Dear  Friend,  —  You  are  like  God.  We  pray  to 
Him,  and  he  answers  *  No.*  Then  we  pray  to  Him 
to  rescind  the  '  no,*  and  He  don*t  answer  at  all,  yet 
*  Seek  and  ye  shall  find  *  is  the  boon  of  faith. 

You  failed  to  keep  your  appointment  with  the 
apple-blossoms  —  the  japonica,  even,  bore  an  apple 


1883]  TO  MISS  MARIA    WHITNEY  343 

to  elicit  you,  but  that  must  be  a  silver  bell  which 
calls  the  human  heart. 

I  still  hope  that  you  live,  and  in  lands  of 
consciousness. 

It  is  Commencement  now.     Pathos  is  very  busy. 

The  past  is  not  a  package  one  can  lay  away.  I 
see  my  father's  eyes,  and  those  of  Mr  Bowles  — 
those  isolated  comets.  If  the  future  is  mighty  as 
the  past,  what  may  vista  be? 

With  my  foot  in  a  sling  from  a  vicious  sprain,  and 
reminded  of  you  almost  to  tears  by  the  week  and 
its  witness,  I  send  this  sombre  word. 

The  vane  defines  the  wind. 

Where  we  thought  you  were,  Austin  says  you  are 
not.  How  strange  to  change  one's  sky,  unless  one's 
star  go  with  it,  but  yours  has  left  an  astral  wake. 

Vinnie  gives  her  hand. 

Always  with  love, 

Emily. 

To  the  Same 

[1883?] 

Dear  Friend,  —  Your  sweet  self-reprehension 
makes  us  look  within,  which  is  so  wild  a  place  we 
are  soon  dismayed,  but  the  seed  sown  in  the  lake 
bears  the  liquid  flower,  and  so  of  all  your  words. . 

I  am  glad  you  accept  rest. 

Too  many  disdain  it.  I  am  glad  you  go  to  the 
Adirondacks. 

To  me  the  name  is  homelike,  for  one  of  my  lost 
went  every  year  with  an  Indian  guide,  before  the 


344  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1883 

woods  were  broken.  Had  you  been  here  it  would 
Le  sw^"^  br-  '  .,  like  the  peach,  is  later.  With  a 
to-morrow  in  its  cupboard,  who  would  be  *  an 
hungered '  ? 

Thank  you  for  thinking  of  Dick.  He  is  now  the 
horse  of  association. 

Men  are  picking  the  grass  from  father's  meadow 
to  lay  it  away  for  winter,  and  it  takes  them  a  long 
time.  They  bring  three  horses  of  their  own,  but 
Dick,  ever  gallant,  offers  to  help,  and  bears  a  little 
machine  Uke  a  top,  which  spins  the  grass  away. 

It  seems  very  much  like  a  gentleman  getting  his 
own  supper  —  for  what  is  his  supper  winter  nights 
but  tumblers  of  clover? 

You  speak  of  'disillusion.*  That  is  one  of  the 
few  subjects  on  which  I  am  an  infidel.  Life  is  so 
strong  a  vision,  not  one  of  it  shall  fail. 

Not  what  the  stars  have  done,  but  what  they  are 
to  do,  is  what  detains  the  sky. 

We  shall  watch  for  the  promised  words  from  the 
Adirondacks,  and  hope  the  recess  will  all  be  joy. 
To  have  been  made  alive  is  so  chief  a  thing,  all  else 
inevitably  adds.  Were  it  not  riddled  by  partings,  it 
were  too  divine. 

I  was  never  certain  that  mother  had  died,  except 
while  the  students  were  singing.  The  voices  came 
from  another  life.  .  .  . 

Good- night,  dear.  Excuse  me  for  staying  so  long. 
I  love  to  come  to  you.  To  one  who  creates,  or  con- 
soles, thought,  what  an  obligation  ! 

Emily. 


1883]  TO  MISS  MARIA    WHITNEY  345 

To  the  Same 

[1883?]  \ 

Dear  Friend,  —  Has  the  journey  ceased,  or  is  it 
still  progressing,  and  has  Nature  won  you  away  from 
us,  as  we  feared  she  would? 

Othello  is  uneasy,  but  then  Othellos  always  are, 
they  hold  such  mighty  stakes. 

Austin  brought  me  the  picture  of  Salvini  when  he 
was  last  in  Boston. 

The  brow  is  that  of  Deity  —  the  eyes,  those  of 
the  lost,  but  the  power  lies  in  the  throat —  pleading, 
sovereign,  savage  —  the  panther  and  the  dove  ! 

Each,  how  innocent ! 

I  hope  you  found  the  mountains  cordial  —  fol- 
lowed your  meeting  with  the  lakes  with  affecting 
sympathy. 

Changelessness  is  Nature's  change. 

The  plants  went  into  camp  last  night,  their  tender 
armor  insufficient  for  the  crafty  nights. 

That  is  one  of  the  parting  acts  of  the  year,  and 
has  an  emerald  pathos  —  and  Austin  hangs  bouquets 
of  com  in  the  piazza's  ceiling,  also  an  omen,  for 
Austin  believes. 

The  *  golden  bowl '  breaks  soundlessly,  but  it  will 
not  be  whole  again  till  another  year. 

Did  you  read  Emily  Bronte's  marvellous  verse  ? 

*  Though  earth  and  man  were  gone, 
And  suns  and  universes  ceased  to  be, 

And  Thou  wert  left  alone, 
Every  existence  would  exist  in  Thee.' 


346  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1884 

We  are  pining  to  khow  of  you,  and  Vinnie  thinks 
to  see  you  would  be  the  opening  of  the  burr.  .  .  , 

Emily,  with  love. 

To  the  Same 
[Probably  1884.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  The  little  package  of  Ceylon 
arrived  in  fragrant  safety,  and  CaHban's  '  clust'ring 
filberds  *  were  not  so  luscious  nor  so  brown. 

Honey  in  March  is  blissful  as  inopportune,  and  to 
caress  the  bee  a  severe  temptation,  but  was  not 
temptation  the  first  zest? 

We  shall  seek  to  be  frugal  with  our  sweet  posses- 
sions, though  their  enticingness  quite  leads  us 
astray,  and  shall  endow  Austin,  as  we  often  do,  after 
a  parched  day. 

For  how  much  we  thank  you. 

Dear  arrears  of  tenderness  we  can  never  repay 
till  the  wiirs  great  ores  are  finally  sifted ;  but  bullion 
is  better  than  minted  things,  for  it  has  no  alloy. 

Thinking  of  you  with  fresher  love,  as  the  Bible 
boyishly  says,  '  New  every  morning  and  fresh  every 
evening,* 

Emily, 

To  the  Same 

[Probably  1884.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  cannot  depict  a  friend  to  my 
mind  till  I  know  what  he  is  doing,  and  three  of  us 


1884]  TO  MISS  MARIA   WHITNEY  347 

want  to  depict  you.  I  inquire  your  avocation  of 
Austin,  and  he  says  you  are  'engaged  in  a  great 
work ' !  That  is  momentous  but  not  defining.  The 
thought  of  you  in  the  great  city  has  a  halo  of 
wilderness. 

Console  us  by  dispelling  it.  .  .  • 

Vinnie  is  happy  with  her  duties,  her  pussies,  and 
her  posies,  for  the  little  garden  within,  though  tiny, 
is  triumphant. 

There  are  scarlet  carnations,  with  a  witching  sug- 
gestion, and  hyacinths  covered  with  promises  which 
I  know  they  will  keep. 

How  precious  to  hear  you  ring  at  the  door,  and 
Vinnie  ushering  you  to  those  melodious  moments 
of  which  friends  are  composed. 

This  also  is  fiction. 

I  fear  we  shall  care  very  little  for  the  technical 

resurrection,  when  to  behold  the  one  face  that  to  us 

comprised  it  is  too  much  for  us,  and  I   dare  not 

tliink  of  the  voraciousness  of  that  only  gaze  and  its 

only  return. 

Remembrance  is  the  great  tempter. 

Emily. 

Emily  Dickinson's  first  letter  to  the  son  of 
her  old  friend,  Mr  Bowles,  was  written  four 
years  after  his  father's  death,  and  contained 
a  spray  of  pressed  jasmine. 


348  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1883 

To  Mr  Samuel  Bowles 
[1882.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  A  tree  your  father  gave  me  bore 
this  priceless  flower. 

Would  you  accept  it  because  of  him  — 

Who  abdicated  ambush 
And  went  the  way  of  dusk, 
And  now,  against  his  subtle  name, 
There  stands  an  asterisk 
As  confident  of  him  as  we  ,* 
Impregnable  we  are  — 
The  whole  of  Immortality 
Secreted  in  a  star. 

E.  Dickinson, 

To  the  Same 
[1882.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  My  mother  and  sister  hoped  to 
see  you,  and  I,  to  have  heard  the  voice  in  the  house 
that  recalls  the  strange  music  of  your  father's.  A 
little  bin  of  blossoms  I  designed  for  your  breakfast 
also  went  astray. 

I  hope  you  are  in  strength,  and  that  the  passen- 
gers of  peace  exalt,  not  rend,  your  memory.  Heaven 
may  give  them  rank,  it  could  not  give  them  grandeur, 
for  that  they  carried  with  themselves. 

With  fresh  remembrance, 

E.  Dickinson. 


i882]  TO  MR  SAMUEL  BOWLES  349 

To  the  Same 

[August  2,  1882.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  Our  friend  your  father  was  so 
beautifully  and  intimately  recalled  to-day  that  it 
seemed  impossible  he  had  experienced  the  secret 
of  death. 

A  servant  who  had  been  with  us  a  long  time,  and 
had  often  opened  the  door  for  him,  asked  me  how 
to  spell  'genius'  yesterday.  I  told  her  and  she 
said  no  more.  To-day  she  asked  me  what  '  genius  * 
meant.     I  told  her  none  had  known. 

She  said  she  read  in  a  Catholic  paper  that  Mr 
Bowles  was  '  the  genius  of  Hampshire,*  and  thought 
it  might  be  that  past  gentleman.  His  look  could 
not  be  extinguished  to  any  who  had  seen  him, 
for  'because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also,'  was  his 
physiognomy. 

I  congratulate  you  upon  his  immortality,  which  is 
a  constant  stimulus  to  my  household,  and  upon  your 
noble  perpetuation  of  his  cherished  Republican. 

Please  remember  me  tenderly  to  your  mother. 

With  honor, 

Emily  Dickinson. 

This  is  the  only  letter  I  have  found,  written 
since  early  girlhood,  in  which  Emily  Dickin- 
son signed  her  name  in  this  way. 

About  1882  she  wrote  of  the  elder  Mr 
Bowles  to  another   friend,  *  I  dreamed  Satur- 


350  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1885 

day  night  of  precious  Mr  Bowles.  One  glance 
of  his  would  light  a  world.'  Upon  learning  of 
his  son's  engagement,  Emily  sent  her  unique 
congratulation:  — 

[October,  1883.] 

Dear  Friend, — 

The  clock  strikes  one  that  just  struck  two  — 
Some  schism  in  the  sum ; 
A  sorcerer  from  Genesis 
Has  wrecked  the  pendulum. 

With  warmest  congratulation, 

E.  Dickinson. 

After  the  birth  of  Samuel  Bowles  the  Fifth : 

To  the  Same 
[August,  1885.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  did  not  know. 

God  bless  you  indeed  ! 

Extend  to  that  small  hand  my  own  *  right  hand  of 
fellowship,'  and  guide  the  woman  of  your  heart 
softly  to  my  own. 

I  give  *  his  angels  charge  '  —  well-remembered 
angels,  whose  absence  only  dims  our  eyes.  The 
magnanimity  I  asked,  you  how  freely  gave  ! 

If  ever  of  any  act  of  mine  you  should  be  in  need, 

let  me  reply  with  the  laureate,  *  Speak  that  I  live  to 

hear.' 

Vitally, 

E.  Dickinson. 


1885]  TO  MR  SAMUEL  BOWLES  35 1 

To  the  Same 

[August  19, 1885.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  May  I  ask  a  service  so  sacred 
as  that  you  will  address  and  mail  a  note  to  the  friend 
of  my  friend  Mrs  Jackson?  I  do  not  know  Mr 
Jackson's  address,  and  desire  to  write  him. 

That  your  loved  confederate  and  yourself  are  in 
ceaseless  peace  is  my  happy  faith. 

The   sweet-peas  you  hallowed  stand  in  carmine 

sheaves.     Would  that  you  could  plunder  them. 

Gratefully, 

E.  Dickinson. 

To  the  Same 
[On  receiving  some  flowers.] 

Dear  Friends,  —  Had   I   not  known  I  was  not 

asleep,  I  should  have  feared  I  dreamed,  so  blissful 

was  their  beauty,  but  day  and  they  demurred.  .  .  . 

With  joyous  thanks, 

E.  Dickinson. 

In  the  dim  and  early  dawn  of  a  fragrant 
summer  morning  soon  after,  Emily  caused  a 
large  cluster  of  sweet-peas  to  be  gathered 
from  her  dewy,  old-fashioned  garden,  that  they 
might  be  put  on  the  very  first  train  to  Spring- 
field, taking  the  freshness  of  summer  itself  to 
her  friends.     This  note  accompanied  them  :  — 

Dawn  and  dew  my  bearers  be. 

Ever, 

Butterfly, 


352  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1885 

And  the  old  garden  still  overflows  with 
annual  fragrance  and  color.  Its  armies  of 
many-hued  hyacinths  run  riot  in  the  spring 
sunshine,  while  crocuses  and  daffodils  peer 
above  the  fresh  grass  under  the  apple-trees ;  a 
large  magnolia  holds  its  pink  cups  toward  the 
blue  sky,  and  scarlet  hawthorn  lights  a  greenly 
dusky  corner. 

And  then  the  roses,  and  the  hedges  of 
sweet-peas ;  the  masses  of  nasturtiums,  and 
the  stately  procession  of  hollyhocks,  in  happy 
association  with  huge  bushes  of  lemon  ver- 
bena! Still  later  comes  the  autumn  glory, 
with  salvia  and  brilliant  zinnias  and  marigolds 
and  clustering  chrysanthemums,  until  *  ranks 
of  seeds  their  witness  bear,*  and  November  folds 
her  brown  mantle  over  sleeping  flowers. 

This  sweet  garden,  with  its  whiffs  of  long 
ago,  needs  only  borders  of  box  and  a  sun-dial 
to  be  the  ideally  imagined  pleasure-spot  of 
vanished  generations.  And  Emily  seems  its 
presiding  genius ;  it  is  instinct  with  her  pres- 
ence still,  though  even  before  her  death  years 
had  passed  since  her  footsteps  pressed  its 
paths,  or  her  fingers  gathered  its  riches. 

In  different  mood  from  the  cheerful  letters 
to  Mr  Bowles  are  these  more  sombre  ones  to 
Mr  Clark.     Begun  by  association  through  the 


1882]  TO  MR  J.  D.  CLARK  353 

death  of  a  mutual  friend,  they  continued  to 
be  tinged  with  the  sadness  of  other  and  fol- 
lowing deaths,  until  his  own,  when  letters  to 
his  brother  took  their  place  until  almost  her 
own  flitting. 

To  Mr  y,  D,   Clark 

[1882.] 
.  .  .  He  never  spoke  of  himself,  and  encroach- 
ment I  know  would  have  slain  him.  .  .  .  He  was  a 
dusk  gem,  bora  of  troubled  waters,  astray  in  any 
crest  below.  Heaven  might  give  him  peace,  it  could  \ 
not  give  him  grandeur,  for  that  he  carried  with  him- 
self to  whatever  scene.  .  .  . 

Obtaining  but  his  own  extent 

In  whatsoever  realm, 

'T  was  Christ's  own  personal  expanse 

That  bore  him  from  the  tomb. 

To  the  Same 
[Late  Autumn,  1882.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  It  pains  us  very  much  that  you 
have  been  more  ill.  We  hope  you  may  not  be  suf- 
fering now.  Thank  you  for  speaking  so  earnestly 
when  our  mother  died.  We  have  spoken  daily  of 
writing  you,  but  have  felt  unable.  The  great  at- 
tempt to  save  her  life  had  it  been  successful  would 
have  been  fatigueless,  but  failing,  strength  forsook  us. 

No  verse  in  the  Bible  has  frightened  me  so  much 
from  a  child  as  'from  him  that  hath  not,  shall  be 


354  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1883 

taken  even  that  he  hath.*  Was  it  because  its  dark 
menace  deepened  our  own  door?  You  speak  as  if 
you  still  missed  your  mother.  I  wish  we  might 
speak  with  you.  As  we  bore  her  dear  form  through 
the  wilderness,  light  seemed  to  have  stopped. 

Her  dying  feels  to  me  like  many  kinds  of  cold  — 
at  times  electric,  at  times  benumbing,  —  then  a 
trackless  waste  love  has  never  trod.  .  .  . 

The  letter  from  the  skies,  which  accompanied 
yours,  was  indeed  a  boon,  A  letter  alwa)rs  seemed 
to  me  like  Immortality,  for  is  it  not  the  mind  alone, 
without  corporeal  friend? 

I  hope  you  may  tell  us  that  you  are  better. 

Thank  you  for  much  kindness.  The  friend  an- 
guish reveals  is  the  slowest  forgot. 

E.  Dickinson. 

To  the  Same 

[March,  1883.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  In  these  few  weeks  of  ignorance 
of  you,  we  tnist  that  you  are  growing  stronger,  and 
drawing  near  that  sweet  physician,  an  approaching 
spring,  for  the  ear  of  the  heart  hears  bluebirds  al- 
ready, those  enthralling  signals.  .  .  .  The  great  con- 
fidences of  life  are  first  disclosed  by  their  departure, 
and  I  feel  that  I  ceaselessly  ought  to  thank  you. 
.  .  .  Our  household  is  scarcely  larger  than  yours  — 
Vinnie  and  I  and  two  servants  composing  our 
simple  realm,  though  my  brother  is  with  us  often 
each  day.     I  wish  I  could  show  you  the  hyacinths. 


#^^^ 


e  ^ 


^^  e 


P^  ^^ 


&gt;:^. 


a^  -^^  #1^ 


^^  a  r  ^ 


c  &gt;^ 


^^^  -*  ^  *l^  o^ 


^  (^ 


t  &gt;  ^ 


^er^0^    ^ 


^    ^    &lt;9 


^    ^ 


^  ^  P 


&lt;^-/»    • 


^&gt; 


'^    ^    ^    d&gt; 


P-  e  ^  ^  dkx&gt; 


356  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1883 

that   embarrass   us   by  their  loveliness,  though   to 

cower  before  a  flower  is  perhaps  unwise,  but  beauty 

is  often  timidity  —  perhaps  oftener  pain. 

A  soft  *  Where  is  she  ? '  is  all  that  is  left  of  our 

loved  mother,  and  thank  you  for  all  you  told  us 

of  yours.  .  .  . 

Faithfully, 

£.   DlCiONSON. 

To  the  Same 
[1883.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  To  thank  you  is  impossible,  be- 
cause your  gifts  are  from  the  sky,  more  precious 
than  the  birds,  because  more  disembodied.  I  can 
only  express  my  rejoiced  surprise  by  the  phrase  in 
the  Scripture,  *  And  I  saw  the  Heavens  opened.'  .  .  . 

Fathoms  are  sudden  neighbors; 

Ignorant  till  your  note  that  our  President's  d3dng 
had  defrauded  you,  we  are  grieved  anew,  and  has- 
ten to  offer  you  our  sorrow. 

We  shall  make  Mrs  Chadboume's  acquaintance 

in  flowers  after  a  few  days.     '  Displeasure '  would  be 

a  morose  word  toward  a  friend  so  earnest,  and  we 

only  fear  when  you  delay,  that  you  feel  more   ill. 

Allow  us  to  hear  the  birds   for  you,  should  they 

indeed  come. 

E.  D. 

This  is  the  last  letter  to  Mr  Clark,  and  upon 
hearing  of  his  farther  illness,  she  wrote  his 
brother :  — 


1883]  TO  MR  C.  H.  CLARK  357 

To  Mr  C.  H.  Clark 
[April  18, 1883] 

Dear  Friend,  —  Would  it  be  possible  you  would 
excuse  me  if  I  once  more  inquire  for  the  health  of 
the  brother  whom  association  has  made  sacred  ? 

With  the  trust  that  your  own  is  impairless,  and 
that  fear  for  your  brother  has  not  too  much  de- 
pressed you,  please  accept  the  solicitude  of  myself 

and  my  sister. 

E.  Dickinson. 

To  the  Same 

[April  22,  1883.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  The  sorrowful  tidings  of  your 
note  almost  dissuade  reply,  lest  I  for  one  moment 
take  you  from  your  brother's  bedside.  I  have  de- 
layed to  tell  my  sister  till  I  hear  again,  fearing  to 
newly  grieve  her,  and  hoping  an  encouraging  word 
by  another  mail. 

Please  be   sure  we   are  with  you   in   sorrowing 

thought,  and  take  your  brother's  hand  for  me,  if  it 

is  still  with  you.     Perhaps  the  one  has  called  him  of 

whom  we  have  so  often  talked  during  this  grieved 

year. 

With  sympathy, 

E.  Dickinson. 

To  the  Same 
[May  I,  1883.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  The  temptation  to  inquire  every 
morning  for  your  sufferer  is  almost  irresistible,  but 

VOL.  II. — 9 


3S8  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1883 

our  own  invalid  taught  us  that  a  sick  room  is  at 
times  too  sacred  a  place  for  a  friend's  knock,  timid 
as  that  is. 

I  trust  this  sweet  May  morning  is  not  without  its 
peace  to  your  brother  and  you,  though  the  richest 
peace  is  of  sorrow. 

With  constant  and  fervent  anxiousness,  and  the 

hope  of  an  early  word,  please   be  sure  we  share 

your  suspense. 

£.  Dickinson. 

To  the  Same 

[May  21,  1883.] 

Dear  Friend, — We  have  much  fear,  both  for  your 
own  strength  and  the  health  of  your  brother,  hav- 
ing heard  nothing  since  we  last  asked,  many  diy% 
ago.  Will  you  not,  when  possible,  give  us  but  a  syl- 
lable, even  a  cheering  accent,  if  no  more  be  true  ? 
We  think  of  you  and  your  sufferer  with  intense  anx- 
iety, wishing  some  act  or  word  of  ours  might  be 
hope  or  help.  The  humming-birds  and  orioles  fly 
by  me  as  I  write,  and  I  long  to  guide  their  enchanted 
feet  to  your  brother's  chamber. 

Excuse  me  for  knocking.  Please  also  excuse  me 
for  staying  so  long.  Spring  is  a  strange  land  when 
our  friends  are  ill. 

With  my  sister's  tenderest  alarm,  as  also  my  own, 

E.  DiCKINSOil. 


1883]  TO  MR  C,  H.  CLARK  359 

To  the  Same 
[June  7, 1883.] 

I  had,  dear  friend,  the  deep  hope  that  I  might 
see  your  brother  before  he  passed  from  Ufa,  or 
rather  Ufe  we  know,  and  can  scarcely  express  the 
pang  I  feel  at  its  last  denial. 

His  rare  and  hallowed  kindness  had  strangely  en- 
deared him,  and  I  cannot  be  comforted  not  to  thank 
him  before  he  went  so  far. 

I  never  had  met  your  brother  but  once.  An  un- 
forgotten  once  —  to  have  seen  him  but  once  more 
would  have  been  almost  like  an  interview  with  my 
'Heavenly  Father*  whom  he  loved  and  knew.  I 
hope  he  was  able  to  speak  with  you  in  his  closing 
moment.  One  accent  of  courage  as  he  took  his  flight 
would  assist  your  heart.  I  am  eager  to  know  all  you 
may  tell  me  of  those  final  days.  We  asked  for  him 
every  morning,  in  heart,  but  feared  to  disturb  you 
by  inquiry  aloud.  I  hope  you  are  not  too  far  ex- 
hausted from  your  '  loved  employ.* 

To  know  of  you  when  possible  would  console  us 

much,  and  every  circumstance  of  him  we  had  hoped 

to  see.  .  .  . 

E.  D. 

To  the  Same 

[June  16, 1883.] 

Dear  Friend,  — Thank  you  for  the  paper.  I  fck 
it  almost  a  bliss  of  sorrow  that  the  name  so  long  in 
Heaven  on  earth,  should  be  on  earth  in  Heaven. 


36o  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1883 

Do  you  know  if  either  of  his  sons  have  his  myste- 
rious face  or  his  momentous  nature? 

The  stars  are  not  hereditary.  I  hope  your  brother 
and  himself  resumed  the  tie  above,  so  dear  to  each 
below.  Your  bond  to  your  brother  reminds  me  of 
mine  to  my  sister  —  early,  earnest,  indissoluble. 
Without  her  life  were  fear,  and  Paradise  a  cowardice, 
except  for  her  inciting  voice. 

Should  you  have  any  picture  of  your  brother,  I 
should  rejoice  to  see  it  at  some  convenient  hour  — 
and  though  we  cannot  know  the  last,  would  you 
sometime  tell  me  as  near  the  last  as  your  grieved 
voice  is  able?   .  .  . 

Are  you  certain  there  is  another  life  ?  When  over- 
whelmed to  know,  I  fear  that  few  are  sure. 

My  sister  gives  her  grief  with  mine.  Had  we 
known  in  time,  your  brother  would  have  borne  our 
flowers  in  his  mute  hand.     With  tears, 

E.  Dickinson. 

To  the  Same 
[July  9, 1883.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  While  I  thank  you  immediately 
for  the  invaluable  gift,  I  cannot  express  the  bereave- 
ment that  I  am  no  more  to  behold  it.  Believing 
that  we  are  to  have  no  face  in  a  farther  life,  makes 
the  look  of  a  friend  a  boon  almost  too  precious. 

The  resemblance  is  faithful  —  the  scholarly  gen- 
tleness—  the  noble  modesty  —  the  absence  of  every 


1884]  TO  MR  a  H.  CLARK  36 1 

dross,  quite  there.  What  a  consoling  prize  to  yon, 
his  mate  through  years  of  anguish  so  much  sharper 
to  see  because  endured  so  willingly. 

Chastening  would  seem  unneeded  by  so  supreme 
a  spirit. 

I  feel  great  grief  for  you  —  I  hope  his  mem- 
ory may  help  you,  so  recently  a  life.  I  wish  I  might 
say  one  liquid  word  to  make  your  sorrow  less.  Is 
not  the  devotion  that  you  gave  him  an  acute  balm  ? 
Had  you  not  been  with  him  how  solitary  the  will 
of  God ! 

Thank  you  for  every  word  of  his  pure  career,  I 
hope  it  is  nearer  us  than  we  are  aware.  Will  you 
not  still  tell  us  of  yourself  and  your  home  —  from 
which  this  patient  guest  has  flown?  I  am  glad  he 
lies  near  us  —  and  thank  you  for  the  tidings  of  our 
other  fugitive,  whom  to  know  was  life.  I  can 
scarcely  tell  you  how  deeply  I  cherish  your  thought- 
fulness.  To  still  know  of  the  dead  is  a  great  per- 
mission, and  you  have  almost  enabled  that.  With  the 
ceaseless  sympathy  of  myself  and  my  sister,  and  the 

trust  that  our  sufferer  rests, 

E.  Dickinson. 

To  the  Same 

[January  4,  1884.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  have  been  very  ill  since  early 
October,  and  unable  to  thank  you  for  the  sacred 
kindness,  but  treasured  it  each  day,  and  hasten  with 
my  first   steps,    and   my   fiiUest  gratitude.  ...  I 


362  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1884 

never  can  thank  you  as  I  feel.  That  would  be  impos- 
sible. The  effort  ends  in  tears.  You  seem,  by  some 
deep  accident,  to  be  the  only  tie  between  the  Heaven 
that  evanesced,  and  the  Heaven  that  stays.  I  hope 
the  winged  days  that  bear  you  to  your  brother  are 
not  too  destitute  of  song,  and  wish  that  we  might 
speak  with  you  of  him  and  of  yourself,  and  of  the 
third  member  of  that  sundered  trio.  Perhaps 
another  spring  would  call  you  to  Northampton,  and 
memory  might  invite  you  here.  .  .  . 

With  a  deep  New  Year, 

Your  friend, 

E.  Dickinson. 

[Enclosing  pressed  flowers,  February  22,  1884.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  hoped  it  might  gratify  you  to 
meet  the  little  flower  which  was  my  final  ministry  to 
your  brother,  and  which  even  in  that  faint  hour,  I 
trust  he  recognized,  though  the  thronged  spirit  had 
not  access  to  words. 

These  are  my  first  out,  and  their  golden  trifles  are 
too  full  of  association  to  remain  unshared. 

With  faithful  thought  of  yourself  and  your  brother, 
brothers  in  bereavement  even  as  myself, 

£.  Dickinson. 

To  the  Same 

[April  21,  1884.] 

Never  unmindful  of  your  anxiety  for  your  father, 
dear  friend,  I  refrained  from  asking,  lest  even  the 


1884]  TO  MR  C.  H.  CLARK  363 

moment  engrossed  by  reply,  might  take  you  from 
him. 

The  peril  of  a  parent  is  a  peculiar  pang,  and  one 
which  my  sister  and  myself  so  long  experienced,  — 
oh,  would  it  were  longer,  for  even  fear  for  them 
were  dearer  than  their  absence,  —  that  we  cannot 
resist  to  offer  you  our  earnest  sympathy.  I  most  sin- 
cerely trust  that  the  sight  is  redeemed,  so  precious 
to  you  both,  more  than  vicariously  to  you  —  even 
filially  —  and  that  the  added  fear  has  not  exhausted 
you  beyond  the  art  of  spring  to  cheer. 

I  have  lost,  since  writing  you,  another  cherished 
friend,  a  word  of  whom  I  enclose  —  and  how  to  re- 
pair my  shattered  ranks  is  a  besetting  pain.  Be  sure 
that  my  sister  and  myself  never  forget  your  brother, 
nor  his  bereaved  comrade. 

To  be  certain  we  were  to  meet  our  lost  would  be 
a  vista  of  reunion  who  of  us  could  bear  ?  .  .  . 

Faithfully, 

E.  Dickinson. 

To  the  Same 

[April  22,  1884.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  These  thoughts  disquiet  me,  and 
the  great  friend  is  gone  who  could  solace  them.  Do 
they  disturb  you? 

The  spirit  lasts,  but  in  what  mode  ^- 
Below,  the  body  speaks. 
But  as  the  spirit  furnishes  — 
Apart  it  never  talks. 


364  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1885 

The  music  in  the  violin 

Does  not  emerge  alone 

But  arm  in  arm  with  touch,  yet  touch 

Alone  is  not  a  tune. 

The  spirit  lurks  within  the  flesh 

Like  tides  within  the  sea 

That  make  the  water  live ;  estranged 

"What  would  the  either  be  ? 

Does  that  know  now,  or  does  it  cease, 

That  which  to  this  is  done. 

Resuming  at  a  mutual  date 

With  every  future  one  ? 

Instinct  pursues  the  adamant 

Exacting  this  reply  — 

Adversity,  if  it  may  be. 

Or  wild  prosperity. 

The  rumor's  gate  was  shut  so  tight 

Before  my  mind  was  sown, 

Not  even  a  prognostic's  push 

Could  make  a  dent  thereon. 

With  the  trust  you  live, 

E.  Dickinson. 

To  the  Same 
[January  18,  1885.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  Though  no  New  Year  be  old,  to 
wish  yourself  and  your  honored  father  a  new  and 
happy  one  is  involuntary,  and  I  am  sure  we  are  both 
reminded  of  that  sacred  past  which  has  forever  hal- 
lowed us. 

I  trust  the  years  which  they  behold  are  also  new 
and  happy,  or  is  it  a  joyous  expanse  of  year,  with- 
out bisecting  months  —  untiring  Anno  Domini  ?  Had 


i88sl  TO  MR  C.  H.  CLARK  365 

we  but  one  assuring  word,  but  a  letter  is  a  joy  of 
earth  —  it  is  denied  the  gods.  Vivid  in  our  immor- 
tal group  we  still  behold  your  brother,  and  never 
hear  Northampton  bells  without  saluting  him.  .  .  . 

Have  you  blossoms  and  books,  those  solaces  of 
sorrow  ?  That,  I  would  also  love  to  know,  and  re- 
ceive for  yourself  and  your  father  the  forgetless 
sympathy  of 

Your  friend, 

E.  Dickinson. 

To  the  Same 

[April  21,  1885.1 

Dear  Friend,  —  The  flower  for  which  your  brother 
cared  resumes  its  siren  circuit,  and  choosing  a  few 
for  his  name's  sake,  I  enclose  them  to  you.  Perhaps 
from  some  far  site  he  overlooks  their  transit,  and 
smiles  at  the  beatitudes  so  recently  his  own. 
Ephemeral,  eternal  heart ! 

I  hope  you  are  in  health,  and  that  the  fragile 
father  has  every  peace  that  years  possess.  .  .  . 

We  think  of  your  small  mansion  with  unabated 
warmth,  though  is  not  any  mansion  vast  that  contains 
a  father? 

That  this  beloved  spring  inspirit  both  yourself  and 
him,  is  our  exceeding  wish. 

E.  Dickinson. 

The  final  letter  to  Mr  Clark  was  written  a 
year  later,  and  will  be  found  in  the  last  chapter. 


CHAPTER   IX 

To  Mr  and  Mrs  J,  L,  Jenkins^  Mrs  Hanson 
Readf  Mrs  IV.  A.  Stearns ^  Mrs  Edward 
TuckermaUy  Mrs  J.  S.  Cooper^  Mrs  A,  B,  H. 
Davis y  Mrs  H.  F,  Hills^  Mrs  Jameson^  Mr 
F,  F,  EmersoHf  Maggie  Maher^  Mr  and 
Mrs  George  Montaguey  Mrs  W.  F,  Steams^ 
Mr  J,  K.  Chickcringy  Mrs  Joseph  Sweetser^ 
Mr  Thomas  NileSy  Mrs  Camtichael^  Dr  and 
Mrs  Thomas  P.  Fields  Mr  Theodore  Holland^ 
'  H.  //".,'  Miss  Eugetiia  Hall,  Mrs  E.  P. 
Crowelly  and  Mrs  J.  C,  Greenough 

THE  characteristic  notes  in  this  chapter 
were,  with  few  exceptions,  written  to 
friends  in  Amherst,  accompanying  flowers  or 
other  dainties,  or  acknowledging  those  sent  to 
herself,  —  not  infrequently  a  sentence  of  conso- 
lation for  some  pain,  or  a  few  words  of  cheering 
appreciation  for  a  new  happiness. 

The  first  may  be  dated  as  early  as  1872 ;  but 
the  largest  number  are,  undoubtedly*  to  be 
assigned  to  the  last  six  or  seven  years  of 
Emily  Dickinson's  life. 


1872]  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  367 

After  her  father's  death,  her  retirement  from 
ordinary  forms  of  human  intercourse  became 
almost  complete;  and  these  notes  were  the 
sole  link  still  binding  her  to  the  world,  —  and 
to  only  such  part  of  the  world  as  might  be  rep- 
resented by  those  for  whom  she  cared. 

Emily's  prose  style  had  developed  its  incisive- 
ness,  —  like  her  own  thought,  it  went  straight 
to  the  essence  of  things ;  and  while  still  dressed 
in  language  sufficiently  to  pass  in  conventional 
places,  it  had  gradually  become  divested  of 
everything  superfluous. 

While  the  meaning  of  certain  phrases  has 
sometimes  puzzled  those  who  received  the 
notes,  there  is  invariably  an  original,  spark- 
ling interpretation  for  every  sentence,  clear  to 
any  soul  possessing  even  slight  accord  with 
hers.  Because  frequently  couched  in  the  form 
of  apparently  mysterious  oracles,  the  meaning 
is  sometimes  looked  for  too  deeply,  —  often 
it  is  singularly  obvious.  The  remarkable  char- 
acter of  these  notes  seems  to  have  increased  as 
she  lived  farther  and  farther  away  from  the 
years  when  she  had  seen  and  conversed  with 
her  friends;  and  her  life  was  full  of  thought 
and  occupation  during  these  introspective  days. 
It  is  impossible  to  conceive  that  any  sense  of 
personal  isolation,  or  real  loneliness  of  spirit, 
because  of  the  absence  of  humanity  from  her 


368  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1872 

daily  life,  could  have  oppressed  a  nature  so 
richly  endowed. 

Most  of  us  would  require  some  sudden  blow, 
some  fierce  crisis,  to  produce  such  a  result,  — 
a  hidden  and  unusual  life  like  hers.  And  we 
love  to  believe  striking  and  theatrical  things  of 
our  neighbors;  it  panders  to  that  romantic 
element  latent  in  the  plainest.  But  Emily 
Dickinson's  method  of  living  was  so  simple 
and  natural  an  outcome  of  her  increasingly 
shy  nature,  a  development  so  perfectly  in  the 
line  of  her  whole  constitution  that  no  far-away 
and  dramatic  explanation  of  her  quiet  life  is 
necessary  to  those  who  are  capable  of  appre- 
hending her. 

That  sentence  alone  would  reveal  the  key 
wherein  she  wrote  with  regret  for  her  long- 
time maid  Margaret :  *  I  winced  at  her  loss, 
for  I  am  in  the  habit  of  her,  and  even  a  new 
rolling-pin  has  an  embarrassing  element.' 

Emerson  somewhere  says,  *Now  and  then 
a  man  exquisitely  made  can  live  alone ; '  and 
Lord  Bacon  puts  the  thought  with  even  greater 
force  and  directness,  —  *  Whosoever  is  de- 
lighted in  Solitude  is  either  a  Wilde  Beast  or 
a  God.' 

To  some  natures,  introspection  is  a  necessity 
for  expression.  *  Why  should  I  feel  lonely?  ' 
exclaimed  Thoreau,  in  his  temporary  isolation 


1872]  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  369 

at  Walden,  *Is  not  our  planet  in  the  Milky- 
Way  ? '  He  was,  indeed,  *  no  more  lonely  than 
the  North  Star,'  nor,  I  believe,  was  Emily 
Dickinson,  although  congenial  companionship 
had,  in  a  sense,  been  very  dear  to  her. 
She  has  herself  written :  — 

Never  for  society 
He  shall  seek  in  vain 
Who  his  own  acquaintance 
Cultivates ;  of  men 
Wiser  men  may  weary, 
But  the  man  within 
Never  knew  satiety,  — 
Better  entertain 
Than  could  Border  Ballad, 
Or  Biscayan  Hymn ; 
Neither  introduction 
Need  you  —  unto  him. 

Georg  Ebers  once  wrote :  *  Sheep  and  geese 
become  restless  when  separated  from  the  flock ; 
the  eagle  and  lion  seek  isolation,'  —  a  pictur- 
esque and  perhaps  not  less  strong  presentation 
of  a  nearly  identical  thought. 

But  although  invisible  for  years,  even  to 
life-long  friends,  Emily  never  denied  herself  to 
children.  To  them  she  was  always  accessible, 
always  delightful,  and  in  their  eyes  a  sort  of 
fairy  guardian.  Stories  are  yet  told  of  her 
roguishly  lowering  baskets  of  'goodies*  out 
of  her  window  by  a  string  to  little  ones  wait- 


370  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1871 

ing  below.  Mr  MacGregor  Jenkins,  in  a  sketch 
of  his  recollections  of  Emily  Dickinson,^  has 
shown  this  gracious  and  womanly  side  of  her 
nature  in  a  very  charming  way,  quoting  a  num- 
ber of  her  notes  to  himself  and  his  sister,  two 
members  of  a  quartette  of  children  admitted 
to  her  intimacy.  Many  of  Emily  Dickinson's 
daintiest  verses  are  for  children,  —  among  them 
The  Sleeping  Flowers^  SindOut  of  the  Morning? 
The  notes  written  during  their  childhood  to 
Mr  Jenkins  and  his  sister  follow,  with  others 
to  their  father  and  mother :  — 

[1872  ?] 

Happy  *  Did  *  and  Mac,  —  We  can  offer  you 
nothing  so  charming  as  your  own  hearts,  which  we 
would  seek  to  possess,  had  we  the  requisite  wiles. 

Dear  Boys,  —  Please  never  grow  up,  which  is 

*  far  better.*      Please  never  *  improve  '  —  you  are 

perfect  now. 

Emily. 

Little  Women,  —  Which  shall  it  be,  geraniums 
or  tulips? 

The  butterfly  upon  the  sky,  who  does  n't  know  its  name. 
And  has  n't  any  tax  to  pay,  and  has  n*t  any  home, 
Is  just  as  high  as  you  and  I,  and  higher,  I  believe  — 
So  soar  away  and  never  sigh,  for  that 's  the  way  to  grieve. 

^   The  Christian  Union^  October  24,  1891. 

2  Poems,  Second  Series,  page  122.        •  Ibid^  page  II3. 


1874]  TO  MR  AND  MISS  JENKINS  371 

Katie  *  Did  '  from  Katie  *  Did  n*t.' 

Will  the  sweet  child  who  sent  me  the  butterflies, 
herself  a  member  of  the  same  ethereal  nation,  ac- 
cept a  rustic  kiss,  flavored,  we  trust,  with  clover? 

Amherst. 

[Christmas,  1874.] 

.  .  .  Atmospherically  it  was  the  most  beautiful 
Christmas  on  record.  The  hens  came  to  the  door 
with  Santa  Claus,  the  pussies  washed  themselves  in 
the  open  air  without  chilling  their  tongues,  and 
Santa  Claus  —  sweet  old  gentleman  —  was  even 
gallanter  than  usual.  Visitors  from  the  chimney 
were  a  new  dismay,  but  all  of  them  brought  their 
hands  so  full  and  behaved  so  sweetly,  only  a  churl 
could  have  turned  them  away.  And  then  the  ones 
at  the  bam  were  so  happy  !  Maggie  gave  the  hens 
a  check  for  potatoes,  each  of  the  cats  had  a  gilt- 
edged  bone,  and  the  horse  had  new  blankets  from 
Boston. 

Do  you  remember  dark-eyed  Mr  Dickinson  who 

used  to  shake  your  hand  when  it  was  so  little  it 

had  hardly  a  stem?     He,  too,  had  a  beautiful  gift  of 

roses  from  a  friend  away.    It  was  a  lovely  Christmas. 

But  what  made  you  remember  me  ?    Tell  me  with 

a  kiss  —  or  is  it  a  secret  ? 

Ebuly. 

To  a  niece  of  her  father's,  who  had  sent  for 
his  grave  the  roses  alluded  to,  she  wrote :  — 


372  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [187^ 

[December,  1874.] 
I  am  sure  you  must  have  remembered  that  father 
had  *  become  as  little  children/  or  you  would  never 
have  dared  send  him  a  Christmas  gift,  for  you  know 
how  he  frowned  upon  Santa  Claus,  and  all  such 
prowling  gentlemen. 

To  the  Rev,  J,  Z.  Jenkins  and  Mrs  Jenkins^  enclosing 
some  sprays  of  rowen  tied  with  white  ribbon 

[Autumn,  187-.] 

Dear  Mr  and  Mrs  Pastor,  —  Mrs  Holland 
pleased  us  and  grieved  us,  by  telling  us  your 
triumphs. 

We  want  you  to  conquer,  but  we  want  you  to 
conquer  here. 

'  Marathon '  is  me.  Is  there  nothing  but  glow  in 
the  new  horizon? 

You  see  we  keep  a  jealous  heart.  That  is  Love's 
alloy. 

Vinnie  is  full  of  wrath,  and  vicious  as  Saul  toward 
the  Holy  Ghost,  in  whatever  form.  I  heard  her 
declaiming  the  other  night,  to  a  foe  that  called  — 
and  sent  Maggie  to  part  them. 

Vinnie  lives  on  the  hope  that  you  will  return.  Is 
it  quite  fictitious?    You  are  gone  too  long. 

The  red  leaves  take  the  green  leaves'  place,  and 
the  landscape  yields.  We  go  to  sleep  with  the 
peach  in  our  hands  and  wake  with  the  stone,  but 
the  stone  is  the  pledge  of  summers  to  come. 


i875l  TO  MR  AND  MRS  JENKINS  373 

Love  for  each  of  you,  always,  and  if  there  are 
lands  longer  than  *  always,*  love  also  for  those. 

These  are  sticks  of  rowen  for  your  stove.  It  was 
chopped  by  bees,  and  butterflies  piled  it,  Saturday 

afternoons. 

Emily. 

To  the  Same 

[1875?] 

.  .  .  There  would  have  been  no  smile  on  Am- 
herst's face,  had  she  believed  her  clergyman's  sweet 
wife  to  be  suffering,  but  the  paper  spoke  so  oblig- 
ingly, we  thought  it  an  accident  that  endeared, 
rather  than  endangered.  That  sorrow  dare  to  touch 
the  loved  is  a  mournful  insult  —  we  are  all  avenging 
it  all  the  time,  though  as  Lowell  quotes  from  the 
stranger  *  Live  —  live  even  to  be  unkind.* 

It  is  hard  to  think  of  our  '  little  friend  *  as  a  suf- 
ferer—  we,  peculiarly,  know  how  hard,  through  our 
suffering  mother  —  but  the  tiniest  ones  are  the 
mightiest  —  the  wren  will  prevail  .  .  . 

*  Bruised  for  our  iniquities  *  I  had  almost  feared. 
Amherst,  tell  her,  suggests  her — each  of  you,  my 
shepherd,  and  will,  while  will  remains. 

Emily. 

To  the  Same 

Would  you  feel  more  at  home  with  a  flower  from 

home  in  your  hand,  dear? 
VOL.  II.  — 10 


374  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1878 

To  the  Same 

May  the  love  that  occasioned  the  first  Easter 
shelter  a  few,  this  bereaved  day. 

To  the  Same 

[1877  n 

Dear  Friend,  —  It  was  pathetic  to  see  your 
voice,  instead  of  hearing  it,  for  it  had  grown  sweetiy 
familiar  in  the  house,  as  a  bird's. 

Father  left  us  in  June  —  you  leave  us  in  May.  I 
am  glad  there  will  be  no  April  till  another  year.  .  .  . 

Sorrow  is  unsafe,  when  it  is  real  sorrow  —  I  am 
glad  so  many  are  counterfeits  —  guileless  because 
they  beheve  themselves. 

Kiss  'Diddie*  and  Mac  for  us  —  precious  refu- 
gees, with  love  for  our  brother,  whom  with  yourself, 
we  follow  the  peculiar  distance,  '  even  unto  the 
end.' 

Perhaps  it  is  *the  end'  now — I  think  the  bell 
thought  so,  because  it  bade  us  all  good-by  when 
you  stood  in  the  door. 

You  concealed  that  you  heard  it.     Thank  you. 

Emily. 

[June,  1878.] 

You  deserved  a  tiding  before,  dear. 

Your  little  punctualities  are  generous  and  pre- 
cious. .  .  . 

There  is  a  circus  here,  and  farmers'  Commence- 
ment, and  boys  and  girls  from  Tripoli,  and  Gover- 


1873]  "^O  M^^  HANSON  READ  375 

nors  and  swords  parade  the  summer  streets.  They 
lean  upon  the  fence  that  guards  the  quiet  church 
ground,  and  jar  the  grass,  now  warm  and  soft  as  a 
tropic  nest. 

Many  people  call,  and  wish  for  you  with  tears, 
and  Vinnie  beats  her  wings  like  a  maddened  bird, 
whose  home  has  been  invaded. 

So  much  has  been  sorrow,  that  to  fall  asleep  in 
Tennyson's  verse,  seems  almost  a  pillow.  *To 
where  beyond  these  voices  there  is  Peace.' 

I  hope  you  are  each  safe.  It  is  homeless  without 
you,  and  we  think  of  others  possessing  you  with  the 
throe  of  Othello. 

Mother  gives  her  love  —  Maggie  pleads  her  own. 
Austin  smiles  when  you  mention  him.  .  .  . 

Daisies  and  ferns  are  with  us,  and  he  whose 
meadow  they  magnify,  is  always  linked  with  you. 

Emily. 

To  Mrs  Hanson  Read,  accompanying  flowers  for 
the  funeral  of  her  two  little  boys 

[December  27,  1873] 
Vinnie  sa)rs  your  martyrs  were  fond  of  flowers. 

Would  these  profane  their  vase  ? 

Emh-y. 

To  the  Same 
[Upon  a  subsequent  anniversary.] 

My  Dear  Mrs  Read,  —  We  have  often  thought  of 
you  to-day,  and  almost  spoken  with  you,  but  thought 


3/6  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1S75 

you  might  like  to  be  alone  —  if  one  can  be  alone 
with  so  thronged  a  Heaven. 

£.  DiCKINSOM. 

To  Mrs  W.  A.  SUams 
[Autumn,  1874.] 

Will  the  dear  ones  who  eased  the  grieved  days 

spurn  the  fading  orchard? 

Emily. 

To  the  Same 
[Upon  receiving  an  Easter  card,  probably  1875.] 

It  is  possible,  dear  friend,  that  the  rising  of  the 
one  we  lost  would  have  engrossed  me  to  the  exclu- 
sion of  Christ's  —  but  for  your  lovely  admonition. 

Sabbath  morning  was  peculiarly  dear  to  my  lather, 
and  his  unsuspecting  last  earthly  day  with  his  fiumly 
was  that  heavenly  one. 

Vinnie  and  I  were  talking  of  you  as  we  went  to 
sleep  Saturday  night,  which  makes  your  beautifid 
gift  of  to-day  almost  apparitional. 

Please  believe  how  sweetly  I  thank  you. 

EmLY. 

To  the  Same 

[1875.1 
What  tenements  of  clover 
Are  fitting  for  the  bee, 
What  edifices  azure 
For  butterflies  and  me  — 


1876]  TO    MRS  W.  A.  STEARNS  377 

What  residences  nimble 

Arise  and  evanesce 

Without  a  rhythmic  rumor 

Or  an  assaulting  guess. 

With  love, 

£.  Dickinson. 

To  the  Same 

[1875] 

Dear  Friend,  — That  a  pansy  is  transitive,  is  its 
only  pang. 

This,  precluding  that,  is  indeed  divine. 

Bringing  you  handfuls  in  prospective,  thank  you 

for  the  love.     Many  an  angel,  with  its  needle,  toils 

beneath  the  snow. 

With  tenderness  for  your  mate, 

Emily. 

[Spring,  1876.] 

Dear    Friends,  —  Might    these    be  among  the 

fabrics  which  the  Bible  designates  as  beyond  rubies? 

Certainly  they  are  more  accessible  to  the  fingers 

of  your  thief 

Emily. 

When  President  Stearns  died,  this  stanza 
came  to  Mrs  Stearns :  — 

[June  8,  1876.] 

Love's  stricken  '  why ' 

Is  all  that  love  can  speak  — 

Built  of  but  just  a  syllable 

The  hugest  hearts  that  break. 

Emily. 


3/8  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1878 

At  the  death  of  Professor  Snell,  September 
18,  1876,  Emily  sent  to  his  family  a  beautiful 
mass  of  flowers,  purple  and  white ;  and  with 
them,  this  single  line :  — 

I  had  a  father  once. 

To  Mrs  Stearns^  in  response  to  a  box  of  strawberries 

received  early  in  March 

[1877?! 

Dear  Friend, — The  little  package  of  nectar 
mother  opened  herself,  though  her  hands  are  frail  as 
a  child*s. 

She  could  not  believe  them  real  till  I  had  hidden 
one  in  her  mouth,  which  somewhat  convinced  her. 
She  asks  me  to  thank  you  tenderly.  The  love  of 
her  friends  is  the  only  remnant  of  her  grieved  life, 
and  she  clings  to  it  timidly. 

I  hope  you  are  quite  well,  and  am  sure  we  some- 
times think  of  each  other,  endeared  by  that  most 
hallowed  thorn,  a  mutual  loss. 

With  sweet  remembrance  for  your  niece,  of  whom 
my  sister  speaks, 

EllilLY. 

To  the  Same 

[1878.] 

Dear  Friends, — The  seraphic  shame  generosity 
causes  is  perhaps  its  most  heavenly  result. 

To  make  even  Heaven  more  heavenly,  is  within 
the  aim  of  us  all. 


i874l  TO  MRS  EDWARD  TUCKERMAN  379 

I  was  much  touched  by  the  little  fence  dividing 
the  devotions,  though  devotion  should  always  wear  a 
fence,  to  pre-empt  its  claim. 

Why  the  full  heart  is  speechless,  is  one  of  the 

great  wherefores. 

Emily,  with  love. 

To  the  Same 

[1879?] 

Dear  Friends,  —  I  hope  no  bolder  lover  brought 
you  the  first  pond  lilies.  The  water  is  deeper  than 
the  land.     The  swimmer  never  stagnates. 

I  shall  bring  you  a  handful  of  lotus  next,  but  do 

not  tell  the  Nile. 

He  is  a  jealous  brook. 

Emily. 

To  the  Same 

*A  little  flower,  a  faded  flower,  the  gifl  of  one 

who  cared  for  me.* 

Please  usurp  the  pronoun. 

Emily. 

The  first  of  the  following  notes,  accompa- 
nied with  a  box  of  flowers,  was  an  apology 
for  tardy  congratulations  upon  Mrs  Tucker- 
man's  safe  return  from  a  long  visit  in  Europe : 

To  Mrs  Edward  Tuckerman 
[January,  1874.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  fear  my  congratulation,  like 
repentance  according  to  Calvin,  is  too  late  to  be 


380  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1875 

plausible,  but  might  there  not  be  an  exception,  were 
the  delight  or  the  penitence  found  to  be  durable  ? 

Emily. 

To  the  Same 
[March,  1875.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  It  was  so  long  my  custom  to 

seek  you  with  the  birds,  they  would  scarcely  feel  at 

home  should  I  do  otherwise,  though  as  home  itself 

is  far  from  home  since  my  father  died,  why  should 

custom  tire? 

Emily. 

To  the  Same,  sent  with  yellow  flowers  when  the 
country  was  drenched  in  rain 

[May,  1875.] 

I  send  you  inland  buttercups  as  out-door  flowers 
are  still  at  sea. 

Emily. 

To  the  Same 

[Accompanying  a  box  of  the  delicious  chocolate  caramels 
she  sent  her  friends  at  New  Year's,  with  the  recipe.] 

Vinnie  says  the  dear  friend  would  like  the  rule. 
We  have  no  statutes  here,  but  each  does  as  it  will, 
which  is  the  sweetest  jurisprudence. 

With  it,  I  enclose  Love's '  remainder  biscuit/  some- 
what scorched  perhaps  in  baking,  but  '  Love's  oven 
is  warm.*     Forgive  the  base  proportions. 

The  fairer  ones  were  borne  away.    The  canna 


1878]  TO  MRS  EDWARD   TUCKERMAN  38 1 

was  a  privilege,  the  little  box  a  bliss,  and  the  blos- 
soms so  real  that  a  fly  waylaid  them,  but  I  lured  him 
away. 

Again  receive    the    love  which    comes  without 

aspect,  and  without  herald  goes. 

Emily. 

To  the  Same 
[About  1877.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  Accept  my  timid  happiness. 

No  joy  can  be  in  vain,  but  adds  to  some  bright 
total,  whose  dwelling  is  unknown. 

The  immortality  of  flowers  must  enrich  our  own, 
and  we  certainly  should  resent  a  redemption  that 
excluded  them. 

Was  not  the  '  breath  of  fragrance '  designed  for 
your  cheek  solely? 

The  fear  that  it  was  crimsons  my  own,  though  to 
divide  its  Heaven  is  Heaven's  highest  half. 

E.  Dickinson. 

To  the  Same 

[June,  1878.] 

Is  it  that  words  are  suddenly  small,  or  that  we  are 
suddenly  large,  that  they  cease  to  suffice  us  to  thank 
a  friend? 

Perhaps  it  is  chiefly  both. 


382  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1878 

To  the  Same 

[July,  1878.] 

Would  it  be  prudent  to  subject  an  apparitional 
interview  to  a  grosser  test  ? 

The  Bible  portentously  says  *  that  which  is  spirit 
is  spirit.' 

Go  not  too  near  a  house  of  rose, 
The  depredation  of  a  breeze 
Or  inundation  of  a  dew 
Alarm  its  walls  away ; 
Nor  try  to  tie  the  butterfly, 
Nor  climb  the  bars  of  ecstasy. 
In  insecurity  to  lie 
Is  joy's  insuring  quality. 

£.  Dickinson. 

To  the  Same 
[August,  1878.) 

To  see  is  perhaps  never  quite  the  sorcery  that  it 
is  to  surmise,  though  the  obligation  to  enchantment 
is  always  binding. 

It  is  sweet  to  recall  that  we  need  not  retrench,  as 
magic  is  our  most  frugal  meal. 

I  fear  you  have  much  happiness,  because  you 
spend  so  much. 

Would  adding  to  it  take  it  away,  or  is  that  a 
penurious  question? 

To  cherish  you  is  intuitive. 

As  we  take  Nature,  without  permission,  let  us 
covet  you. 


i88o]  TO  MR^  EDWARD   TUCKERMAN  383 


To  the  Same 
[January,  1879] 

Your  coming  is  a  symptom  of  summer. 
The  symptom  excels  the  malady. 

To  the  Same 
[September,  1879.] 

Should  dear  Mrs  Tuckerman  have  no  pears  like 

mine,  I  should  never  cease  to  be  harrowed. 

Should  she,  that  also  would  be  dismay. 

I  incur  the  peril. 

Emily. 

To  the  Same 
[January  5,  1880.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  Your  sweetness  intimidates. 

Had  it  been  a  mastiff  that  guarded  Eden,  we 
should  have  feared  him  less  than  we  do  the  angel. 

I  read  your  litde  letter.  It  had,  like  bliss,  the 
minute  length. 

It  were  dearer  had  you  protracted  it;  but  the 
sparrow  must  not  propound  his  crumb. 

We  shall  find  the  cube  of  the  rainbow, 
Of  that  there  is  no  doubt ; 
But  the  arc  of  a  lover's  conjecture 
Eludes  the  finding  out. 

Confidingly, 

Emily. 


384  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICI^NSON  [1880 


To  the  Same 
[March,  1880.] 

The  robin  is  a  Gabriel 

In  humble  circumstances, 

His  dress  denotes  him  socially 

Of  transport's  working  classes. 

He  has  the  punctuality 

Of  the  New  England  farmer — 

The  same  oblique  integrity, 

A  vista  vastly  warmer. 

A  small  but  sturdy  residence, 

A  self-denying  household, 

The  guests  of  perspicacity 

Are  all  that  cross  his  threshold. 

As  covert  as  a  fugitive, 

Cajoling  consternation 

By  ditties  to  the  enemy, 

And  sylvan  punctuation. 

Eboly. 

To  the  Same 

[1880.] 

Will  the  little  hands  that  have  brought  me  so 
much  tenderness,  the  sweet  hands  in  which  a  bird 
would  love  to  lie,  the  fingers  that  knew  no  estrange- 
ment except  the  gulf  of  down,  —  will  such  enfold 
a  daphne? 

Almost  I  trust  they  will,  yet  trust  is  such  a  shelv- 
ing word ;  part  of  our  treasures  are  denied  us,  part 


i88ol  TO  MRS  EDWARD   TUCKERMAN  385 

of  them  provisoed,  like  bequests  available  far  hence, 
part  of  them  we  partake. 
Which,  dear,  are  divinest? 

Emily. 

To  the  Same 

[November,  1880.] 

Thank  you,  sweet  friend,  I  am  quite  better. 

Were  I  not,  your  dainty  redemption  would  save 

me. 

With  love  and  a  happy  flower, 


Emily. 


To  the  Same 
[1880.] 

Love  is  done  when  love 's  begun. 
Sages  say. 

But  have  sages  known? 
Truth  adjourn  your  boon 
Without  day. 


Emily. 


To  the  Same 
[After  Professor  Root's  death,  December,  1880.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  thought  of  you,  although   I 
never  saw  your  friend. 

Brother  of  Ophir, 
Bright  adiea, 
Honor  the  shortest 
Route  to  you. 

Emily. 


386  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1881 


To  the  Same 
[New  Year's  Day,  1881.] 

My  bird,  who  is  '  to-day '  ? 

'  Yesterday '  was  a  year  ago,  and  yet 


Saturday, 


The  stem  of  a  departed  flower 
Has  still  a  silent  rank, 
The  bearer  from  an  emerald  coart 
Of  a  despatch  of  pink. 

Thank  you  for  the  lovely  love. 


Emily. 


To  the  Same 

[1881.] 

To  find  my  sweet  friend  is  more  difficult  than  to 

bless  her,  though  I  trust  both  are  slightly  possible 

this  dearest  afternoon. 

Emily. 

The  following  little  poem-note  contained  a 
pressed  dandelion  tied  with  scarlet  ribbon. 

To  the  Same 

[November  8,  1881.] 

The  dandelion's  pallid  tube 
Astonishes  the  grass, 
And  winter  instantly  becomes 
An  infinite  Alas. 
The  tube  uplifts  a  signal  bud, 
And  then  a  shouting  flower ; 
The  proclamation  of  the  suns 
That  sepulture  is  o'er. 


i882]  TO  MRS  EDWARD   TUCKERMAN  387 

Vinnie  told  me,  dear  friend,  you  were  speaking  of 
Mr  Root 

Emily. 
To  the  Same 

[December,  188 1.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  Vinnie  asked  me  if  I  had  any 
message  for  you,  and  while  I  was  picking  it,  you 
ran  away. 

Not  seeing,  still  we  know, 

Not  knowing,  guess ; 

Not  guessing,  smile  and  hide 

And  half  caress. 

And  quake  and  turn  away; 

Seraphic  fear ! 

Is  Eden*s  innuendo 

*  If  you  dare '  ? 

Emily. 

To  the  Same 
[January,  1882.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  The  gray  afternoon  —  the  sweet 
knock,  and  the  ebbing  voice  of  the  boys  are  a  pic- 
torial memory;  and  then  the  little  bins  and  the 
purple  kernels  —  *t  was  like  the  larder  of  a  doll. 

To  the  inditing  heart  we  wish  no  sigh  had  come* 

Sweet  pirate  of  the  heart, 
Not  pirate  of  the  sea. 
What  wrecketh  thee  ? 
Some  spice's  mutiny  — 
Some  attar's  perfidy? 
Confide  in  me. 

Emily. 


388  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  LffCKINSOl/  [1883 

To  the  Same 
[January,  1883] 

The  presence  in  life  of  so  sweet  an  one  is  of  itself 
fortune  —  a  covert  wealth  of  spirit  I  shall  not  dis- 
close. 

I  have  taken  all  the  naughty  boys,  and  Vinnie  the 
navy. 

What  lovely  conceits ! 

Then  the  little  Smyrna  in  the  dish  —  how  tiny, 
how  affecting — though  the  heart  in  the  rear  not 
tiny.     Oh,  no,  vast  as  the  sea. 

To  caress  its  billows  is  our  liquid  aim. 

Emily,  with  love. 

To  the  Same 
[June,  1883.1 

Sweet  foot,  that  comes  when  we  call  it !  I  can 
go  but  a  step  a  century,  now. 

How  slow  the  wind,  how  slow  the  sea, 
How  late  their  feathers  be  I 

Lovingly, 

Emily. 

To  the  Same 
[August,  1883.] 

We  wear  our  sober  dresses  when  we  die, 
But  summer,  frilled  as  for  a  holiday, 
Adjourns  her  sigh. 


1884]  TO  MRS  MDWARD   tucker  MAI/  389 

To  the  Same 
[January,  1884.] 

Dear  Friend  :  — 

To  try  to  speak,  and  miss  the  way, 
And  ask  it  of  the  tears, 
Is  gratitude's  sweet  poverty, 
The  tatters  that  he  wears. 

A  better  coat,  if  he  possessed, 
Would  help  him  to  conceal. 
Not  subjugate,  the  mutineer 
Whose  title  is  *  the  soul/ 

Emily,  with  love. 

To  the  Same 
[February,  1884] 

Do  '  men  gather  grapes  of  thorns  *  ? 

No,  but  they  do  of  roses^  and  even  the  classic  fox 
hushed  his  innuendo,  as  we  unclasped  the  little  box. 

Sherbets  untold,  and  recollection  more  sparkling 
than  sherbets ! 

How  wondrous  is  a  friend,  the  gift  of  neither 
Heaven  nor  earth,  yet  coveted  of  both  ! 

If  the  'archangels  veil  their  faces,*  is  not  the 

sacred  diffidence  on  this  sweet  behalf? 

Emily. 
To  the  Same 

[April,  1884.] 

Be  encouraged,  sweet  friend  !     How  cruel  we  did 

not   know !     But  the  battles  of  those  we  love  are 

often  unseen. 
VOL.  n.  —  II 


390  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1885 

'  If  Thou  hadst  been  here/  Mary  said, '  our  brother 
had  not  died.'  Hanging  my  head  and  my  heart 
with  it,  that  you  sorrowed  alone. 

Late,  but  lovingly, 

ElOLY. 

To  the  Same 
[April,  1885.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  We  want  you  to  wake  —  Easter 

has  come  and  gone. 

Morning  without  you  is  a  dwindled  dawn. 
Quickened  toward  all  celestial  things  by  crows  I 

heard  this  morning,  accept  a  loving  caw  from  a 

Nameless  friend. 

*  Selah.' 

To  the  Same 
[May,  1885.] 

We  trust  the  repairs  of  the  little  friend  are  pro- 
gressing swiftly,  though  shall  we  love  her  as  well, 
revamped  ? 

Anatomical  dishabille  is  sweet  to  those  who 
prize  us. 

A  chastened  grace  is  twice  a  grace.     Nay,  't  is  a 

holiness. 

With  a  sweet  May  day, 

Emily. 

To  the  Same 

[October,  1885.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  thought  of  you  on  your  lonely 
journey,  certain  the  hallowed  heroine  was  gratified. 


i874]  TO  MRS  J.  5.  COOPER  39I 

though  mute.  I  trust  you  return  in  safety  and  with 
closer  clutch  for  that  which  remains,  for  dying  whets 
the  grasp. 

October  is  a  mighty  month,  for  in  it  httle  Gilbert 
died.  *  Open  the  door,'  was  his  last  cry,  '  the  boys 
are  waiting  for  me.'  Quite  used  to  his  command- 
ment, his  little  aunt  obeyed,  and  still  two  years  and 
many  days,  and  he  does  not  return. 

Where  makes  my  lark  his  nest? 

But  Corinthians'  bugle  obliterates  the  birds*,  so 

covering  your  loved  heart  to  keep  it  from  another 

shot,  Tenderly, 

Emily. 

To  Mrs  J.  S.  Cooper 
[June,  1874.] 

Though  a  stranger,  I  am  unwilling  not  to  thank 
you  personally  for  the  delicate  attention  to  my 
family. 

For  the   comprehension  of  suffering,  one  must 

one's  self  have  suffered. 

E.  Dickinson. 

To  the  Same 

[Later  Summer,  1874.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  It  was  my  first  impulse  to  take 

them  to  my  father,  whom  I  cannot  resist  the  grief 

to  expect. 

Thank  you. 

Vinnie's  Sister, 


392  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1S75 

And  to  another  friend,  about  the  same  time» 
she  wrote :  — 

Should  it  be  possible   for  me   to  speak   of  my 

father  before  I  behold  him,  I  shall  try  to  do  so  to 

you,  whom  he  always  remembered. 

Emily. 

To  Mrs  y.  S.  Cooper 
[January,  1875.] 

Is  it  too  late  to  express  my  sorrow  for  my  grieved 
friend? 

Though  the  first  moment  of  loss  is  eternity,  other 
eternities  remain. 

Though  the  great  waters  sleep 

That  they  are  still  the  deep 

We  cannot  doubt 

No  vacillating  God 
i  Ignited  this  abode 

\  To  put  it  out 

To  the  Same 
[On  the  anniversary  of  her  father's  death,  June  16,  1875.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  You  thought  of  it. 
How  dear,  how  delicate  ! 

With  peculiar  love, 

Your  Stranger. 
To  the  Same 

[1875] 

How  can  one  be  fatherless  who  has  a  father's 
friend  within  confiding  reach? 


i«76]  TO  MRS  J.  S.  COOPER  393 

To  the  Same 

*  My  country,  *t  is  of  thee,* 

has  always  meant  the  woods  to  me. 

*  Sweet  land  of  liberty/ 
I  trust  is  your  own. 

To  the  Same 
[After  a  fire,  in  1876.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  congratulate  you. 
Disaster  endears  beyond  fortune. 

E.  Dickinson. 

To  the  Same 

The  keeper  of  golden  flowers  need  have  no  fear 
of  the  '  Silver  BiU.' 

An  Indies  in  the  hand,  at  all  times  fortifying,  is 
peculiarly  so,  perhaps,  to-day. 

Midas  was  a  rogue. 


To  the  Same 
[1876] 

Dear  Friend,  —  Mother  thanks  you  through  me, 
as  she  does  not  use  her  hand  for  writing.  I  hope  the 
vicariousness  may  not  impair  the  fervor. 

Mother  is  very  fond  of  flowers  and  of  recoUection, 
that  sweetest  flower. 

Please  accept  her  happiness,  and  ours  for  causing 

hers. 

E.  Dickinson, 


394  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1880 

To  the  Same 

Trusting  an   April   flower  may  not  curtail  your 
February,  that  month  of  fleetest  sweetness. 

E.  Dickinson. 
To  the  Same 

Dear  Friend,  —  Maggie  was  taking  you  a  flower 
as  you  were  going  out. 

Please  accept  the  design,  and  bewail  the  flower, 
that  sank  of  chagrin  last  evening. 

E.  Dickinson. 

To  the  Same 
The  founders  of  honey  have  no  names. 

To  the  Same 
My  family  of  apparitions  is  select,  though  dim. 

To  the  Same 

Vinnie  suggests  these  little  friends. 

Would  they  be  too  grovelling?    And  I  add  a  face 
from  my  garden. 

Though  you  met  it  before,  it  might  not  be  charm- 
less. 

E.  Dickinson. 

To  the  Same 
[1880] 
Is  sickness  pathos  or  infamy? 
While  you  forget  to  decide,  please  confirm  this 
trifle. 


i88o]  TO  MRS  J.  S.  COOPER  395 

To  the  Same 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  shall  deem  the  little  tumblers 

forever  consecrated  by  the  '  unseemliness.' 

With  affection, 

E.  Dickinson. 

To  the  Same 

Please  accept  the  progeny  of  the  pinks  you  so 
kindly  brought  mother  in  winter,  with  the  hope  that 
'  wisdom  is  justified  of  her  children/ 

To  the  Same 

How  strange  that  Nature  does  not  knock,  and  yet 
does  not  intrude ! 

To  the  Same 

*  Give  me  thine  heart  *  is  too  peremptory  a  court- 
ship for  earth,  however  irresistible  in  Heaven. 

To  the  Same 

Dear  Friend,  —  So  valiant  is  the  intimacy  be- 
tween Nature  and  her  children,  she  addresses  them 

as  ^  comrades  in  arms.' 

E.  Dickinson. 

To  the  Same 

Dear  Friend,  —  Nothing  inclusive  of  a  human 
heart  could  be  *  trivial.*  That  appalling  boon  makes 
all  things  paltry  but  itself. 


396  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1M3 

To  thank  you  would  profane  you  —  there  are 
moments  when  even  gratitude  is  a  desecration. 

Go  thy  great  way  I 

The  stars  thou  meetest 

Are  even  as  thyself. 

For  what  are  stars  but  asterisks 

To  point  a  human  life  ? 

£.  Dickinson,  with  love. 

To  the  Same 

Dear  Friend,  —  In  a  world  too  full  of  beauty  for 
peace,  I  have  met  nothing  more  beautiful. 

£.  Dickinson. 

To  the  Same 

[1883?] 

Dear  Friend,  —  The  thoughtfulness  was  pictur- 
esque and  the  glimpse  delightful.  The  residence  of 
Vinnie's  friends  could  but  be  fair  to  me. 

And  will  you,  in  exchange,  accept  a  view  of  my 
house,  which  Nature  painted  white  without  consult- 
ing me?     But  Nature  is  'old-fashioned,'  perhaps  a 

Puritan. 

£.  Dickinson. 

To  the  Same 

Dear  Friend,  —  It  distressed  us  that  you  were 
pained.  ' 

Are  you  easier  now? 

You  have  sheltered  our  tears  too  often  that  yocirs 
should  fall  unsolaced. 


i879]  TO  MRS  HENRY  HILLS  397 

Give  US  half  the  thorn  —  then  it  will  tear  you  less. 
To  divulge  itself  is  sorrow's  right,  never  its  presump- 
tion. 

Faithfully, 

E.  Dickinson. 

To  the  Same 

[188S  ?] 

Dear  Friend,  —  Is  not  the  sweet  resentment  of 

friends  that  we  are  not  strong,  more  inspiriting  even 

than  the  strength  itself? 

E.  Dickinson. 

[On  sending  flowers  and  apples  to  Mrs  A.  B.  H.  Davis  and 

her  daughter.] 

Dear  Friends,  —  We  are  snatching  our  jewels 
from  the  frost,  and  ask  you  to  help  us  wear  them, 
as  also  the  trinkets  more  rotund,  which  serve  a  baser 

need. 

Emily. 

To  Mrs  Henry  Hills 

[Christmas,  1878  ?] 

With  sweet  Christmas  for  the  '  little  brethren  and 

sisters  of  the  mystic  tie.* 

Emily. 

To  the  Same 

[January,  1879?] 

Our  gentle  neighbor  must  have  known  that  we  did 

not  know  she  was  ill,  or  we  should  immediately  have 

inquired  for  her. 

Emily. 


398  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1879 


To  the  Same 
[February,  1879.] 

We  are  much  grieved  for  the  sufferings  of  the 
little  one,  which  are  so  artlessly  undeserved,  and  beg 
her  mania  to  assure  her  of  our  tender  sympathy. 

The  odor  of  the  flower  might  please  her,  as  these 
little  beings  are  only  '  on  a  furlough '  from  Paradise. 

With   love   for  the   mama,  and  sorrow   for  her 

weariness, 

Emily. 

To  the  Same 

[February  23,  1879.] 
'  Come  unto  me.' 
Beloved  commandment  I     The  darling  obeyed  it. 

To  the  Same 
[February,  1879.] 

The  power  to  console  is  not  within  corporeal  reach 
—  though  its  attempt  is  precious. 

To  die  before  it  feared  to  die,  may  have  been  a 
boon. 

To  the  Same 
[March,  1879.] 

Dfjir  Friend,  —  The  only  balmless  wound  is  the 
departed  human  life  we  had  learned  to  need. 

For  that,  even  Immortality  is  a  slow  solace.  All 
other  peace  has  many  roots  and  will  spring  again. 

With  cheer  from  one  who  knows. 


i88o]  TO  MRS  HENRY  HILLS  399 

To  the  Same 

Dear  Friend,  —  The  gift  was  sadly  exquisite  — 
were  the  actual  'cross*  so  divinely  adorned,  we 
should  covet  it. 

Thank  you  for   the   sacred   *  flowers '  —  typical, 

both  of  them. 

Gethsemane  and  Cana  are  still  a  travelled  route. 

Emily. 

To  the  Same 
[Christmas,  1879.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  think  Heaven  will  not  be  as 
good  as  earth,  unless  it  bring  with  it  that  sweet 
power  to  remember,  which  is  the  staple  of  Heaven 
here. 

How  can  we  thank  each  other  when  omnipotent? 

You,  who  endear  our  mortal  Christmas,  will  per- 
haps assure  us.  £. 

To  the  Same 
[1880.] 

We  are  ignorant  of  the  dear  friends,  and  eager  to 
know  how  they  are,  and  assure  them  that  we  are 
near  them  in  these  grieved  hours. 

Emily. 
To  the  Same 

Dear  Friend,  —  The  heavenly  flowers  were 
brought  to  my  room. 

I  had  lain  awake  with  the  gale  and  overslept  this 
morning. 


400  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1881 


That  you  may  wake  in  Eden,  as  you  enabled  me 

to  do,  is  my  happy  wish. 

Emily. 

To  the  Same 

Without  the  hope  of  requiting  the  Sabbath  morn- 
ing blossoms,  still  sweetly  remembered,  please  allow 

me  to  try.  E. 

To  the  Same 

With  untold  thanks,  and  the  little  dish,  founded 
while  she  was  here,  too  late  to  overtake  her,  too 
small  for  her  to  sip,  but  her  large  heart  will  excuse. 

Enhly,  with  love. 

To  the  Same 

Vocal  is  but  one  form  of  remembrance,  dear 
friend  —  the  cherishing  that  is  speechless  is  equally 
warm. 

To  the  Same 

[With  Christmas  delicacies,  1880.] 

The  little  annual  creatures  solicit  your  regard. 

Mrs  Hills  often  sent  dainties  from  New  York, 
perhaps  Florida  oranges,  confectionery,  or  hot- 
house flowers.  Upon  one  of  these  occasions 
the  reply  came :  — 

[1881.] 

Tropics,   and   dairies,   and   fairies  I     Thank   the 

Arabian  Nights, 

Emily. 


1883]  TO  MRS  JAMESON  4OI 

To  the  Same 
[1881.] 

With  a  kiss  and  a  flower,  one  of  which  will  endure, 
I  am  whom  you  infer. 

To  the  Same 
[1882.] 
Only  a  pond  lily  that  I  tilled  myself. 

To  the  Same 

Dear  Friends,  —  Even  the  simplest  solace,  with  a 

loved  aim,  has  a  heavenly  quality. 

Emily. 

To  the  Same 
[January,  1883.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  We  often  say  '  how  beautiful !  * 
But  when  we  mean  it,  we  can  mean  no  more. 

A  dream  personified.  E. 

To  the  Same 
[With  red  lilies,  Spring,  1883] 
Persian  hues  for  my  dark- eyed  neighbor. 

To  Mrs  Jameson 

Many    and    sweet    birthdays   to   our   thoughtful 

neighbor,  whom  we  have  learned  to  cherish,  though 

ourself  unknown. 

E.  Dickinson. 


402  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1880 

To  the  Same 

How  dare  a  tear  ''jtrude  on  so  sweet  a  cheek? 

Gentlest  Oi  ^    ^hbors,  recall  the  *  sparrows '  and 

the  great  Logician. 

Tenderly, 

£.  Dickinson. 

To  the  Same 

Arthur  forgot  to  set  a  trap  for  Santa  Claus,  but 
that  industrious  mouse  will  excuse  him,  if  he  will 
steal  the  cakes  instead.     And  Annie. 

£.  Dickinson. 

To  

[1880.] 
Dear  Friend,  —  No  '  sonnet  *  had  George  Eliot. 
The  sweet  acclamation  of  Death  is  forever  bounded. 

There  is  no  trumpet  like  the  tomb — 
The  Immortality  she  gave 
"We  borrowed  at  her  grave. 
For  just  one  plaudit  famishing, 
The  might  of  human  love. 

Beautiful  as  it  is,  its  criminal  shortness  maims  it. 

To  Maggie  Maher,  ill  with  Typhoid  Fever  at  her 

own  Home 
[Autumn,  1880.] 

The  missing  Maggie  is  much  mourned,  and  I  am 
going  out  for  *  black '  to  the  nearest  store. 

All  are  very  naughty,  and  I  am  naughtiest  of  all. 


i88o]  TO  MR  P.  P,  EMERSON  403 

The  pussies  dine  on  sherry  now,  and  humming- 
bird cutlets. 

The  invalid  hen  took  dinn.    -^^^  '^•e,  but  a  hen 

like  Dr  T *s  horse  soon  drove  her  away.     I  am 

very  busy  picking  up  stems  and  stamens  as  the 
hollyhocks  leave  their  clothes  around. 

What  shall  I  send  my  weary  Maggie  ?     Pillows  or 

fresh  brooks? 

Her  Grieved  Mistress. 

To  the  Rev,  F.  F.  Emerson 

[1880?] 

A  blossom,  perhaps,  is  an  introduction,  to  whom, 
none  can  infer. 

To  the  Same 

Though  tendered  by  a  stranger,  the  fruit  will  be 
forgiven. 

Valor  in  the  dark  is  my  Maker's  code. 

E.  Dickinson. 

To  the  Same 

Mother  congratulates  Mr  Emerson  on  the  dis- 
covery of  the  '  philosopher's  stone.'  She  will  never 
divulge  it.  It  lay  just  where  she  thought  it  did  — 
in  making  others  happy. 

E.  Dickinson. 


404  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1881 


To  the  Same 

Any  gift  but  spring  seems  a  counterfeit,  but  the 
birds  are  such  sweet  neighbors  they  rebuke  us  all. 

£.  Dickinson. 

To  the  Same 

Mother  was  much  touched  by  dear  Mrs  Emerson's 

thoughtfulness,  and  thanks  her  exceedingly  sweetly. 

She  also  asks  a  remembrance  to  Mr  Emerson,  whom 

she  trusts  is  well. 

Earnestly, 

E.  Dickinson. 

To  the  Same 

1 1881  ?] 

Should  Mr  Emerson  ever  become  ill  and  idle, 
mother  hopes  his  clergyman  will  be  as  delicately 
thoughtful  of  him  as  he  has  been  of  her. 

Gratefully, 

E.  Dickinson. 

71?  the  Same 

Di'jvR  Friend,  —  I  step  from  my  pillow  to  your 
hand  to  thank  its  sacred  contents,  to  hoard,  not  to 
partake,  for  I  am  still  weak. 

The  little  package  has  lain  by  my  side,  not  daring 
to  venture,  or  Vinnie  daring  to  have  me  —  a  hal- 
lowed denial  I  shall  not  forget. 

I  fear  you  may  need  the  papers,  and  ask  you  to 
claim  them  immediately,  would  you  desire  them. 


i88i]    TO  MR  AND  MRS  GEORGE  MONTAGUE   405 

I  trust  you  are  sharing  this  most  sweet  climate 
with  Mrs  Emerson  and  yourself,  than  which  remem- 
brance only  is  more  Arabian. 

Vinnie    brings    her    love,   and   her   sister  what 

gratitude. 

Emily. 


To 


Dear  Friend, —  The  little  book  will  be  subtly 
cherished.  All  we  secure  of  beauty  is  its  evanes- 
cence.    Thank  you  for  recalling  us. 

Earnestly, 

Emily. 

To  Mr  and  Mrs  George  Montague 

ti88i  ?] 

Dear  Cousin,  —  Thank  you   for   the   delightful 

cake,  and  the  heart  adjacent. 

Emily. 

To  the  Same 

Delicate  as  bread  of  flowers.  How  sweetly  we 
thank  you ! 

To  the  Same 

We  trust  the  dear  friend  is  convalescing. 

These  loveliest  of  days  are  certainly  with  that 

design. 

Emily. 

VOL.  II.  — 12 


406  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1881 

Dear  Cousin,  —  The  *  Golden  Rule '  is  so  lovely, 

it  needs  no  police  to  enforce  it 

Cousin. 

To  the  Same 

To  have  *  been  faithful  in  a  few  things '  was  the 
delicate  compliment  paid  one  by  God.  Could  I 
not  commend  a  rarer  candidate  for  his  approval  in 
my  loyal  Cousin? 

To  the  Same 
•  [1881?] 

Which  will  I  thank  —  the  perpetrator,  the  prop- 
agator, or  the  almoner  of  the  delightful  bread  —  or 
may  I  compromise  and  thank  them  all? 

I  for  the  first  time  appreciate  the  exultation  of 
the  robin  toward  a  crumb,  though  he  must  be  a 
seductive  robin,  with  whom  I  would  share  my  own. 

With  the   hope  to   requite   the  loveliness  in  a 

future  way, 

Gratefully, 

Emily. 

To  Mrs  IV.  F.  Steams 
[May,  1881.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  hope  you  may  know  with  what 
unspeakable  tenderness  we  think  of  you  and  of  your 
dear  child. 

Were  it  any  kingdom  but  the  *  Kingdom  of 
Heaven,*  how  distant ! 

But  my  heart  breaks  —  I  can  say  no  more. 

E.  D. 


1879]  '^O  ^^^  JOSEPH  SWEETSER  407 

To  the  Same 
[October,  1882.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  Affection  wants  you  to  know  it 

is  here.    Demand  it  to  the  utmost. 

Tenderly, 

E.  Dickinson. 

One  friend  writes  from  New  York  of  her 
regret  that  many  of  Emily's  notes  to  herself 
have  been  destroyed.  But  she  adds :  '  One 
little  welcome  of  Emily's  to  me  became  a 
household  word ;  and  I  can  quote  it  for  you, 
though  it  should  have  the  setting  of  her  wide, 
pure  margins,  and  her  most  dainty  penman- 
ship.     Here  it  is :  — 

*  Sweet  Mrs  Nellie  comes  with  the  robins.  Robins 
have  wings.  Mrs  Nellie  has  wings.  A  society  for 
the  prevention  of  wings  would  be  a  benefit  to 
us  all. 

*  It  tells  its  own  story,  you  see,  of  a  flitting 
visit  to  the  Grove  in  the  spring,  and  of  her 
interest  in  her  neighbors  and  her  informa- 
tion as  to  their  interests,  though  so  invisible 
herself.* 

To  Mrs  Joseph  Sweetser 

[Autumn,  1879?] 

Aunt  Katie  and  the  sultans  have  left  the  garden 
now,  and  parting  with  my  own  recalls  their  sweet 
companionship. 


408  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1881 

Mine  were  not,  I  think,  as  exuberant  as  in  other 
years,  —  perhaps  the  Pelham  water  shocked  their 
stately  tastes,  —  but  cherished  avariciously  because 
less  numerous.  I  trust  your  garden  was  willing  to 
die.  I  do  not  think  that  mine  was  —  it  perished 
with  beautiful  reluctance,  like  an  evening  star. 

I  hope  you  were  well  since  we  knew  of  you,  and 
as  happy  as  sorrow  would  allow. 

There  are  sweets  of  pathos,  when  sweets  of  mirth 
have  passed  away. 

Mother  has  had  a  weary  cold,,  and  suffers  much 
from  neuralgia  since  the  changing  airs,  though  I 
trust  is  no  feebler  than  when  you  were  here.  She 
has  her  little  pleasures  as  the  patient  have  —  the 
voices  of  friends,  and  devotion  of  home. 

The  ravens  must  *  cry,'  to  be  ministered  to ;  she 
need  only  sigh.  .  .  .  Perhaps  it  is  quite  the  home  it 
was  when  you  last  beheld  it.  I  hope  your  few  are 
safe,  and  your  flowers  encouraging. 

News   of    your   sultans   and  yourself  would   be 

equally  lovely,  when  you  feel  inclined.     Blossoms 

have  their  leisures. 

Lovingly, 

Emily. 

To  the  Same 
[December,  1881.] 

It  was  the  unanimous  opinion  of  the  household 
that  Aunt  Katie  never  wrote  so  lovely  a  letter,  and 
that  it  should  be  immediately  replied  to  by  each 


1884]  TO  MRS  JOSEPH  SWEETSER  409 

member  of  the  family,  from  the  geraniums  down  to 
the  pussies,  but  unforeseen  malignities  prevented. 
Vinnie  lost  her  sultans  too  —  it  was  *  Guiteau  *  year 

—  Presidents  and  Sultans  were  alike  doomed. 

One  might  possibly  come  up,  having  sown  itself 

—  if  it  should,  you  shall  share  —  it  is  an  Eastern 
creature,  and  does  not  like  this  soil.  I  think  its 
first  exuberance  was  purely  accidental.  Last  was  a 
fatal  season.  An  *  envious  worm '  attacked  them ; 
then  in  early  autumn  we  had  midwinter  frost. 
'  When  God  is  with  us,  who  shall  be  against  us,' 
but  when  He  is  against  us,  other  allies  are  useless. 

We  were  much  amused  at  your  '  gardener.'  You 
portrayed  his  treason  so  wittily  it  was  more  effective 
than  loyalty.    He  knew  that  flowers  had  no  tongues. 

We  trust  you  are  safe  this  Norwegian  weather, 
and  *  desire  your  prayers '  for  another  snow-storm, 
just  over  our  heads,  the  snows  already  repealing  the 
fences. 

With  love  for  your  health,  and  the  promise  of 
sultans,  and  viziers  too,  if  the  monarchs  come, 

Emily. 

To  the  Same 

[1884.] 

Dear  Aunt,  —  Thank  you  for  '  considering  the 
lilies.* 

The  Bible  must  have  had  us  in  mind,  when  it  gave 
that  liquid  commandment.  Were  all  its  advice  so 
enchanting  as  that,  we  should  probably  heed  it. 


410  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1884 

Thank  you  for  promptness,  explicitness,  sweetness. 
Your  account  of  the  lilies  was  so  fresh  I  could  almost 
pick  them,  and  the  hope  to  meet  them  in  person,  in 
autumn,  through  your  loving  hand,  is  a  fragrant 
future. 

I  hope  you  are  well  as  you  deserve,  which  is  a 
blest  circumference,  and  give  my  love  to  each. 

Aunt  L just  looked  in  on  us,  and  I  go  to 

make  her  dish  of  homestead  Charlotte  Russe. 

Always, 

Emily. 
To  the  Same 

[November,  1884.] 

Sweet  and  Gracious  Aunt  Katie,  — The  beloved 
lilies  have  come,  and  my  heart  is  so  high  it  over- 
flows, as  this  was  mother's  week,  ELaster  in  No- 
vember. 

Father  rose  in  June,  and  a  little  more  than  a  year 
since,  those  fair  words  were  fulfilled,  *and  a  little 
child  shall  lead  them  *  —  but  boundlessness  for- 
bids me.  .  .  . 

It  is  very  wrong  that  you  were  ill,  and  whom  shall 
I  accuse  ?  The  enemy,  *  eternal,  invisible,  and  full 
of  glory  *  —  but  He  declares  himself  a  friend  I  It  is 
sweet  you  are  better. 

More  beating  that  brave  heart  has  to  do  before 
the  emerald  recess. 

With  sorrow  for  Emma's  accident,  and  love  for  all 

who  cherish  you,  including  the  roses,  your  velvet 

allies, 

Tenderly,  Emily. 


i884l               TO  MRS  JOSEPH  SWBETSER  4II 

—  —     .^ — .^^^  

To  the  Same 

Cousin  T and  Cousin  O little  thought 

when  they  were  paying  their  antiquated  respects  to 
Aunt  Katie  that  they  were  defrauding  Emily  of  that 
last  moment  —  but  they  needed  it  most  —  new 
moments  will  grow. 

When  I  found  it  beyond  my  power  to  see  you,  I 
designed  to  write  you,  immediately,  but  the  Lords 
came  as  you  went,  and  Judge  Lord  was  my  father's 
closest  friend,  so  I  shared  my  moments  with^them 
till  they  left  us  last  Monday;  then  seeing  directly 

after,  the  death  of  your  loved  Dr  A ,  I  felt  you 

might  like  to  be  alone  —  though  Death  is  perhaps 
an  intimate  friend,  not  an  enemy.  Beloved  Shake- 1 
speare  says,  '  He  that  is  robbed  and  smiles,  steals/ 
something  from  the  thief.*  .  .  . 

Maggie  said  you  asked  should  you  '  eat  the  flower.' 
Please  consult  the  bees  —  they  are  the  only  authority 
on  Etruscan  matters.  Vinnie  said  the  sherry  I  sent 
you  was  brandy  —  a  vital  misapprehension.  Please 
also  forgive  it.  I  did  not  intend  to  be  so  base  to 
the  aunt  who  showed  me  the  first  mignonette,  and 
listened  with  me  to  the  great  wheel,  from  Uncle 
Underwood's  '  study,'  and  won  me  in  *  divers  other 
ways '  too  lovely  to  mention.  Of  all  this  we  will 
talk  when  you  come  again. 

Meanwhile  accept  your 

Trifling  Niece. 


412  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1885 

To  the  Same 
[1885.] 
Aunt  Katie's  rose  had  many  thorns,  but  it  is  still  a 
rose,  and  has  borne  the  extremities  of  a  flower  with 
ethereal  patience  —  and  every  deference  to  her  is  so 
sweetly  deserved,  we  do  not  call  it  courtesy,  but 
only  recognition.  It  is  sweeter  that  noon  should  be 
fair,  than  that  morning  should,  because  noon  is  the 
latest,  and  yet  your  morning  had  its  dew  you  would 
not  exchange.  Thank  you  for  telling  us  of  your 
triumphs. 

*  Peace  hath  her  victories,  no  less  than  War.' 

Thank  you  for  speaking  so  tenderly  of  our  latest 
lost.  We  had  hoped  the  persuasions  of  the  spring, 
added  to  our  own,  might  delay  his  going,  but  they 
came  too  late.  *  I  met,'  said  he  in  his  last  note,  *  a 
crocus  and  a  snowdrop  in  my  yesterday's  walk,'  but 
the  sweet  beings  outlived  him.  I  thought  the  church- 
yard Tarrytown,  when  I  was  a  child,  but  now  I  trust 
't  is  Trans  — 

In  this  place  of  shafts,  I  hope  you  may  remain 
unharmed. 

I  congratulate  you  upon  your  children,  and  them- 
selves upon  you. 

To  have  had  such  daughters  is  sanctity — to  have 
had  such  a  mother,  divine.  To  still  have  her —  but 
tears  forbid  me.  My  own  is  in  the  grave.  *So 
loved  her  that  he  died  for  her,'  says  the  explain- 
ing Jesus. 

With  love,  Your  Emily. 


1885]  TO  MRS  JOSEPH  SWEETSER  413 

To  the  Same 

Aunt  Katie  never  forgets  to  be  lovely,  and  the 
sweet  clusters  of  yesterday  only  perpetuate  a  heart 
warm  so  many  years. 

Tropic,  indeed,  a  memory  that  adheres  so  long. 
They  were  still  vivid  and  fragrant  when  they  reached 
my  fingers,  and  were  the  wrist  that  bears  them  bolder, 
it  would  give  reply.  As  it  is,  only  a  kiss  and  a  grati- 
tude, and  every  grace  of  being,  from  your  loving 
niece.     '  I  give  his  angels  charge  I  * 

Should  I  say  his  flowers,  for  qualified  as  saints 
they  are. 

Vinnie's  and  my  transport. 

To  the  Same 

Dear  Aunt,  —  I  have  found  and  give  it  in  love, 
but  reluctant  to  entrust  anything  so  sacred  to  my 
father  as  my  grandfather's  Bible  to  a  public  mes- 
senger, will  wait  till  Mr  Howard  comes,  whom  Mrs 
Nellie  tells  us  is  due  this  week.  Thank  you  for 
loving  my  father  and  mother.  I  hope  they  are 
with  the  Source  of  love.  You  did  not  tell  me  of 
your  health  —  I  trust  because  confirmed.  Thank 
you  too  for  sorrow,  the  one  you  truly  knew. 

With  Vinnie's  affection,  in  haste  and  fondness, 

Emily. 


414  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [i88a 

To  Professor  J.  K,  Chickering 
[Autumn,  1882.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  do  not  know  the  depth  of  my 
indebtedness.  Sorrow,  benighted  with  fathoms,  can- 
not find  its  mind. 

Thank  you  for  assisting  us. 

We  were  timidly  grateful. 

£•  DlCiONSON. 

To  the  Same 

Dear  Friend,  —  Thank  you  for  being  willing  to 
see  me,  but  may  I  defer  so  rare  a  pleasure  till  you 
come  again?  Grief  is  a  sable  introduction,  but  a 
vital  one,  and  I  deem  that  I  knew  you  long  since 
through  your  shielding  thought. 

I  hope  you  may  have  an  electrical  absence,  as  life 
never  loses  its  startlingness,  however  assailed.-  '  Seen 
of  angels '  only,  an  enthralling  aim. 

Thank  you   for  the  kindness,   the   fervor  of   a 

stranger  the  latest  forgot. 

£.  Dickinson. 

To  the  Same 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  had  hoped  to  see  you,  but  have 
no  grace  to  talk,  and  my  own  words  so  chill  and 
burn  me  that  the  temperature  of  other  minds  is  too 
new  an  awe. 

We  shun  it  ere  it  comes, 

Afraid  of  joy, 
Then  sue  it  to  delay, 

And  lest  it  fly 


1885]  TO  MR  J.  K,  CHICKERING  415 

Beguile  it  more  and  more. 

May  not  this  be, 
Old  suitor  Heaven, 

Like  our  dismay  at  thee  ? 

Earnestly, 

E.  Dickinson. 

To  the  Same 

[1885.] 
Dear  Friend,  —  The  Amherst  heart  is  plain  and 
whole  and  permanent  and  warm. 

In  childhood  I  never  sowed  a  seed  unless  it  was 
perennial  —  and  that  is  why  my  garden  lasts. 

We  dare  not  trust  ourselves  to  know  that  you 
indeed  have  left  us. 

The  fiction  is  sufficient  pain.  To  know  you  better 
as  you  flee,  may  be  our  recompense. 

I  hope  that  you  are  well,  and  nothing  mars  your 
peace  but  its  divinity  —  for  ecstasy  is  peril. 

With  earnest  recollection, 

E.  Dickinson. 

To  the  Same 

How  charming  the  magnanimity  which  conferring 
a  favor  on  others,  by  some  mirage  of  valor  considers 
itself  receiving  one ! 

Of  such  is  the  kingdom  of  knights  ! 

E.  Dickinson. 

It  is  hard  for  many  persons  to  believe,  even 
now,  that  Emily  Dickinson  had  nothing  to  do 


4l6  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1880 


with  the  Saxe  Holm  stories,  and  certainly  some 
of  their  incidental  poetry  bears  strong  evidence 
of  her  unique  touch .  The  little  mystery  of  those 
remarkable  tales  was  so  carefully  guarded  that 
after  a  time  people  lost  interest  in  surmising, 
and  are  now  content  to  accept  them  as  they  are. 
The  No  Name  series  of  Roberts  Brothers  was 
not  so  long  a  secret,  and  in  the  volume  of  its 
verse,  A  Masque  of  Poets y  appeared,  probably 
through  the  efforts  of  her  old  friend  'H.  H./ 
Emily  Dickinson's  Success,  afterward  the  open- 
ing poem  in  the  first  of  her  published  vol- 
umes. However  obtained,  it  formed  the 
beginning  of  an  occasional  and  pleasant  cor- 
respondence between  herself  and  Mr  Niles, 
always  the  genial,  helpful,  and  generous  friend 
of  writers.  She  often  sent  him  poems,  which, 
contrary  to  her  usual  custom,  she  had  named 
herself. 

To  Mr  Thomas  Niles 

[1880  ?1 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  bring  you  a  chill  gift  —  My 
Crickef^  and  TTie  Snowj^  A  base  return,  indeed, 
for  the  delightful  book  which  I  infer  from  you,  but 
an  earnest  one. 

1  Poemsy  Second  Series,  page  167. 
*  Poems,  Second  Series,  page  174. 


1885]  TO  MR  THOMAS  NILES  417 

To  the  Same 
[1883?] 

Thank  you,  Mr  Niles. 

I  am  very  grateful  for  the  mistake.  I  should 
thmk  it  irreparable  deprivation  to  know  no  farther 
of  her  here,  with  the  impregnable  chances. 

The  kind  but  incredible  opinion  of  '  H.  H.'  and 
yourself  I  would  like  to  deserve. 

Would  you  accept  a  pebble  I  think  I   gave  to 

her,  though  I  am  not  sure. 

With  thanks, 

E.  Dickinson. 

The  *  pebble  *  was  that  wonderful  stanza, 

How  happy  is  the  little  stone 
That  rambles  in  the  road  alone, 
And  does  n't  care  about  careers. 
And  exigencies  never  fears ; 
Whose  coat  of  elemental  brown 
A  passing  universe  put  on ; 
And  independent  as  the  sun. 
Associates,  or  glows  alone. 
Fulfilling  absolute  decree 
In  casual  simplicity. 

To  the  Same 

[1885] 
Dear  Friend,  —  Thank  you  for  the  kindness. 
I  am  glad  if  the  bird  seemed  true  to  you. 


4l8  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [i88a 

Please  efface  the  others,  and  receive  these  three, 
which  are  more  like  him  —  A  Thunder  Storm}-  A 
Humming  Bird^  ^  and  A  Country  Burial,  • 

The  life  of  Marian  Evans  had  much  I  never  knew 

—  a  doom  of  fruit  without  the  bloom,  like  the  Niger 
fig:  — 

Her  losses  make  our  gains  ashamed  — 

She  bore  life's  empty  pack 

As  gallantly  as  if  the  East 

Were  swinging  at  her  back. 

Life's  empty  pack  is  heaviest, 

As  every  porter  knows  — 

In  vain  to  punish  honey. 

It  only  sweeter  grows. 

To  Mrs  Carmichael 
[1882?] 
...  I  fear  Vinnie  gave  my  message  as  John  Alden 
did  the  one  from  Miles  Standish,  which  resulted  de- 
lightfully for  John,  but  not  as  well  for  his  friend. 

Had  you  seen  the  delighted  crowd  that  gathered 
round  the  box —  did  you  ever  see  a  crowd  of  three? 

—  you  would  have  felt  requited.     Your  presenting 
smile  was  alone  wanting. 

*  Dear  Mrs  Carmichael,'  said  one ;  *  The  one  that 
never  forgets,'  said  another;  and  a  tear  or  two  in 
the  eyes  of  the  third,  and  the  reception  was  over. 
Can  you  guess  which  the  third  was  ? 

1  Poems,  Second  Series,  page  158. 

2  Ibid.,  p.  13a 
'  Ibid.,  p.  207. 


i884]  TO  MRS  CARMICHAEL  419 

The  candy  was  enchanting,  and  is  closeted  in  a 
deep  pail,  pending  Vinnie's  division,  and  the  little 
box,  like  Heaven  and  mice,  far  too  high  to  find. 

Failure  be  my  witness  that  I  have  sought  them 
faithfully. 

We  often  think  of  your  evening  circle  —  Mr  Skeel 
presiding  at  the  piano,  and  Mrs  Skeel  and  yourself 
taking  mutual  lessons. 

I  am  studying  music  now  with  the  jays,  and  find 
them  charming  artists. 

Vinnie  and  Gilbert  have  pretty  battles  on  the  pussy 
question,  and  you  are  needed  for  umpire,  oftener  than 
you  think. 

'Weren't  you  chasing  pussy?*  said  Vinnie  to 
Gilbert.     *  No,  she  was  chasing  herself.* 

*  But  was  n't  she  running  pretty  fast  ?  *  said  pussy's 
Nemesis.  'Well,  some  slow  and  some  fast,*  said  the 
beguiling  villain. 

With  the  little  kiss  he  gave  me  last,  and  a  pair  of 

my  own,  and  love  for  Mr  and  Mrs  Skeel, 

Warmly, 

Emily. 

To  the  Same 

[1884?] 

Loved  Mrs  Carmichael  and  Mrs  Skeel,  —  I 
heard  long  since  at  school  that  Diogenes  went  to  sea 
in  a  tub.  Though  I  did  not  believe  it,  it  is  credible 
now. 

Against  the  peril  of  ocean  steamers  I  am  sweetly 


420  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1885 


provided,  and  am  sure  you  had  my  safety  in  mind, 
in  your  lovely  gifts. 

I  have  taken  the  passengers  from  the  hold  —  pas- 
sengers of  honey — and  the  deck  of  silk  is  just 
promenaded  by  a  bold  fly,  greedy  for  its  sweets. 
The  little  tub  with  the  surcingle  I  shall  keep  till  the 
birds,  tilling  it  then  with  nectars,  in  Mrs  SkeePs 
sweet  honor. 

Will  each  of  the  lovely  fricx^ds  present  my  thanks 
to  the  other,  as  Vinnie's  correspondence  with  them 
is  too  impressive  for  what  dear  Dickens  calls  *the 
likes  of  me*  to  invade. 

Their  sweet  intercession  with  Santa  Claus  in  my 

behalf,  I  shall  long  remember. 

Always, 

Emily. 

To  the  Same 

[1885?] 

My  consoleless  Vinnie  convinces  me  of  the  mis- 
fortune of  having  known  dear  Mrs  Carmichael,  whom 
'to  name  is  to  praise,*  for  indeed,  were  we  both 
intelligent  mourners,  I  fear  delight  would  close ;  but 
the  *  fair  uncertainty  *  aids  me,  which  is  denied  Vinnie. 

Of  her  noble  loss  it  is  needless  to  speak  —  that  is 
incalculable. 

Of  her  sweet  power  to  us  when  we  were  over- 
whelmed, that,  too,  shall  be  mute.  She  has  *  borne 
our  grief  and  carried  our  sorrow,'  that  is  the  cri- 
terion. .  .  . 


1885]  TO  DR  AND  MRS  FIELD  42 1 

Let  me  hope  she  is  well  to-day,  and  sheltered  by 

every  love  she  deserves,  which  were  indeed  countless. 

We  congratulate  sweet  Mrs  Skeel  on  her  beloved 

booty,  }and  ask  a  remembrance  in  her  prayer  for 

those  of' us  bereaved. 

Lovingly, 

Emily. 

To  Dr  and  Mrs  Fields  who  had  sent  flowers 

[1884  ?] 
Expulsion  from  Eden  grows  indistinct  in  the  pres- 
ence of  flowers  so  blissful,  and  with  no  disrespect  to 
Genesis,  Paradise  remains. 

Beaconsfield  says  *  the  time  has  now  come  when 
it  must  be  decided  forever,  who  possesses  the  great 
gates  to  India.' 

I  think  it  must  be  my  neighbor. 

With  delicate  gratitude, 

E.  Dickinson. 
To  the  Same 

[1885.] 
I  was  much  chagrined  by  the  delayed  flower  — 

please  accept  its  apology. 

E.  Dickinson. 

To  the  Same 

[1885.] 

Should  you  not  have  this  flower,  the  first  of  spring 

with  me,  I   should   regret  not   sending  it.    Your 

azaleas  are  still  vivid,  though  the  frailer  flowers  are 

flitted  away. 

E.  Dickinson. 
VOL.  II.  — 13 


422  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1885 


To 


I  send  a  violet,  for  L .    I  should  have  sent  a 

stem,  but  was  overtaken  by  snow-drifts,  I  regret 
deeply  not  to  add  a  butterfly,  but  have  lost  my  hat, 
which  precludes  my  catching  one. 

To ,  with  flowers 

With  the  leave  of  the  bluebirds,  without  whose 
approval  we  do  nothing. 

E.  Dickinson. 

To  Mr  Theodore  Holland 
[1885.1 

Dear  Sir,  —  Your  request  to  *  remain  sincerely  * 
mine  demands  investigation,  and  if  after  synopsis  of 
your  career  all  should  seem  correct,  I  am  tersely 
yours.  I  shall  try  to  wear  the  unmerited  honor  with 
becoming  volume. 

Commend  me  to  your  kindred,  for  whom,  although 
a  stranger,  I  entertain  esteem. 

I  approve  the  paint  —  a  study  of  the  Soudan,  I 

take  it,  but  the  Scripture  assures  us  our  hearts  are 

all  Dongola. 

£.  Dickinson. 


To 


[1885.] 

...  If  you  saw  a  bullet  hit  a  bird,  and  he  told 
you  he  was  n*t  shot,  you  might  weep  at  his  courtesy, 


1885]  TO  423 

but  you  would  certainly  doubt  his  word.  Thomas's 
faith  in  anatomy  was  stronger  than  his  faith  in 
faith.  .  .  .  Vesuvius  don't  talk  —  iEtna  don't.  One 
of  them  said  a  syllable,  a  thousand  years  ago,  and 
Pompeii  heard  it  and  hid  forever.  She  could  n't 
look  the  world  in  the  face  afterward,  I  suppose. 
Bashful  Pompeii !  .  .  . 


To 


Dear  Friend,  —  I  thank  you  with  wonder.  Should 
you  ask  me  my  comprehension  of  a  starlight  night, 
awe  were  my  only  reply,  and  so  of  the  mighty  book. 
It  stills,  incites,  infatuates,  blesses  and  blames  in  one. 
Like  human  affection,  we  dare  not  touch  it,  yet  flee, 
what  else  remains? 

But  excuse  me  —  I  know  but  little.  Please  tell 
me  how  it  might  seem  to  you. 

How  vast  is  the  chastisement  of  beauty,  given  us 
by  our  Maker  !  A  word  is  inundation,  when  it  comes 
from  the  sea. 

Peter  took  the  marine  walk  at  the  great  risk. 

E.  Dickinson. 

What  book  may  be  thus  described  is,  unhap- 
pily, not  known,  as  I  have  been  unable  to  dis- 
cover even  to  whom  the  note  was  written. 

A  severe  disappointment  in  the  preparation 
of  these  volumes  is  the  fact  that  Emily's  letters 
to  *  H.  H.'  cannot  be  found. 


424  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1885 

Entertained  delightfully  during  the  summer 
of  1893  at  Mr  Jackson's  lovely  home  in  Colo- 
rado Springs,  I  was  very  happy  to  learn  that 
these  letters  had  certainly  not  been  destroyed. 
During  the  months  before  her  death  Mrs  Jack- 
son had  herself  arranged  her  mass  of  papers, 
letters,'  and  manuscripts,  each  marked  for  its 
fate  ;  and  Emily's  letters  were  especially  re- 
served in  a  package  apart,  as  unique  and  too 
valuable  to  share  the  fate  of  much  other  cor- 
respondence. But  though  careful  search  has 
been  most  kindly  made  by  her  family,  the  let- 
ters still  remain  in  hiding,  and  the  inference 
is  that  they  must  have  been  accidentally  de- 
stroyed in  flames  intended  for  other  things. 

Among  Emily's  own  papers  I  have  found 
this  draft  of  a  letter  to  Mrs  Jackson,  discarded 
on  account  of  a  number  of  substituted  words ; 
and  I  give  it  just  as  it  is,  with  both  erasures 
and  substitutes,  as  an  interesting  study  of  her 
afterthoughts :  — 

To'H.h: 

[March,  1885.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  To  reproach  my  own  foot  in 
behalf  of  yours  is  involuntary,  and  finding  meagre  * 
solace  in  'whom  He  loveth  He  chasteneth,'  your 
valor  ^  astounds  me.     It  was  only  a  small  wasp,  said 

^  Myself  little.  ^  Prowess. 


iSSsl  TO  'H.  W  425 

the  French  physician,  repairing  the  sting,  but  the 
strength  to  perish  is  sometimes  withheld  —  though 
who  but  you  can  *  tell  a  foot. 

Take  all  away  from  me 
But  leave  me  ecstasy, 
And  I  am  richer  then 
Than  all  my  fellow-men. 
Is  it  becoming  me 
To  dwell  so  wealthily, 
When  at  my  very  door 
Are  those  possessing  more, 
In  abject '  poverty  ? 

That  you  glance  at'  Japan  as*  you  breakfast, 
not  in  the  least  surprises  me,  thronged  *  only  with 
music,  like  the  decks*  of  birds. 

Thank  you  for  hoping  I  am  well.  Who  could  be 
ill  in  March,  that  month  of  proclamation  ?  Sleigh- 
bells  and  jays  contend  in  my  matinee,  and  the 
north  surrenders  instead  of  the  south,  a  reverse  of 
bugles. 

Pity  me,  however,  I  have  finished  Ramona,  Would 
that  hke  Shakespeare  it  were  just  published  ! 

Knew  I  how  to  pray,  to  intercede  for  your  foot 
were  intuitive,  but  I  am  but  a  pagan. 

Of  God  we  ask  one  favor,  that  we  may  be  for- 
given. For  what.  He  is  presumed  to  know.  The 
crime,  from  us,  is  hidden. 

1  Could.  *  Compass.  *  Clogged. 

2  Boundless.  *  Before.  •  Wheels. 


426  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1885 

Immured  the  whole  of  life 
Within  a  magic  prison, 
We  reprimand  the  happiness 
That  too  competes  with  Heaven. 

May  I  once  more  know,  and  that  you  are  saved? 

Yours, 

£.  Dickinson. 

After  Mrs  Jackson's  death,  August  12,  1885, 
Emily  wrote  of  her:  — 

Helen  of  Troy  will  die,  but  Helen  of  Colorado, 
never.  Dear  friend,  can  you  walk,  were  the  last 
words  that  I  wrote  her. 

Dear  friend,  I  can  fly  — 
Her  immortal  reply. 


To 


Sweet  Friends,  —  I  send  a  message  by  a  mouth 
that  cannot  speak. 

The  ecstasy  to  guess 
Were  a  receipted  bliss 
If  grace  could  talk. 

With  love. 


To 


.  .  .  What  a  hazard  an  accent  is  !  When  I  think 
of  the  hearts  it  has  scuttled  or  sunk,  I  almost  fear  to 
lift  my  hand  to  so  much  as  a  punctuation. 


1885]        TO  MRS  CROWELL  AND  MISS  HALL       427 

To  Mrs  E.  P.   Crowellf  when  about  to  sail  for 

Europe 

[March  2,  1885.] 

Is  it  too  late  to  touch  you,  dear  ? 
We  this  moment  knew. 
Love  marine  and  love  terrene, 
Love  celestial  too. 


I  give  his  angels  charge. 


Emily. 


To  Miss  Eugenia  Hail 

[1885?] 

Let  me  thank  the  little  cousin  in  flowers,  which, 

without  lips,  have  language. 

Somewhat  cousin, 

Emh-y. 

To  the  Same 

Dear  *  Genie,'  —  The  lovely  flower  you  sent  me 
is  like  a  little  vase  of  spice,  and  fills  the  hall  with 
cinnamon. 

You  must  have  skilful  hands  to  make  such  sweet 

carnations.     Perhaps  your  doll  taught  you.     I  know 

that  dolls  are  sometimes  wise.    Robins  are  my  dolls. 

I  am  glad  you  love  the  blossoms  so  well.     I  hope 

you  love  birds,  too.     It  is  economical.     It  saves 

going  to  Heaven. 

Lovingly, 

Emily. 


428  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1885 

To  the  Same^  with  a   Wedding  Gift,  October  ao, 

188s 

Will  the  sweet  cousin  who  is  about  to  make  the 

Etruscan  experiment,  accept  a  smile  which  will  last 

a  life,  if  ripened  in  the  sun? 

Cousin  Eboly. 

Three  notes  were  sent  at  different  times,  with 
flowers,  to  Mrs  J.  C.  Greenough :  — 

Lest  any  bee  should  boast. 

Trusting  the  happy  flower  will  meet  you  at  the 
door  where  spring  will  soon  be  knocking,  we  chal- 
lenge your  *  come  in.' 

Emily. 

The  flower  keeps  its  appointment  —  should  the 

heart  be  tardy? 

When  Memory  rings  her  bell,  let  all  the  thoughts 

run  in. 

Emily. 

To  Mrs  Greenough^  after  her  Mother's  Death, 

October,  1885 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  had  the  luxury  of  a  mother  a 
month  longer  than  you,  for  my  own  mother  died  in 
November,  but  the  anguish  also  was  granted  me  to 
see  the  first  snow  upon  her  grave  the  following  day, 
which,  dear  friend,  you  were  spared. 


1885]  TO  MRS  J,  C   GRBBNOUGH  429 

But  Remembrance  engulfs  me,  and  I  must  cease. 

I  wish  I  could  speak  a  word  of  courage,  though 
that  love  has  already  done.  Who  could  be  mother- 
less who  has  a  mother's  grave  within  confiding 
reach? 

Let  me  enclose  the  tenderness  bom  of  bereave- 
ment. 

To  have  had  a  mother  —  how  mighty !  i 

EMrnv. 


CHAPTER  X 

To  Mrs  Todd,  Mrs  Tnckemtan,  the  Misses , 

Mr  Clark y  and  Mrs  Currier 

FROM  the  many  notes  sent  me  by  Emily 
Dickinson  during  the  last  four  years  of 
her  life,  it  was  a  difBcult  matter  to  select  those 
best  fitted  for  publication.  But  the  first  one 
available  was  probably  this  response  to  a  small 
panel  which  I  had  painted  for  her,  —  a  group 
of  Indian  pipes,  those  weird  white  flowers  of 
shade  and  silence :  — 

To  Mrs  Todd 
[Winter,  1882.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  That  without  suspecting  it  you 
should  send  me  the  preferred  flower  of  life,  seems 
almost  supernatural,  and  the  sweet  glee  that  I  felt  at 
meeting  it  I  could  confide  to  none.  I  still  cherish 
the  clutch  with  which  I  bore  it  from  the  ground 
when  a  wondering  child,  an  unearthly  booty,  and 
maturity  only  enhances  mystery,  never  decreases 


i88al  TO  MRS  TODD  43 1 

it.  To  duplicate  the  vision  is  even  more  amazing, 
for  God's  unique  capacity  is  too  surprising  to  sur- 
prise. I  know  not  how  to  thank  you.  We  do  not 
thank  the  rainbow,  although  its  trophy  is  a  snare. 

To  give  delight  is  hallowed  —  perhaps  the  toil  of 
angels,  whose  avocations  are  concealed. 

I  trust  that  you  are  well,  and  the  quaint  little 

girl  with  the  deep  eyes,  every  day  more  fathomless. 

With  joy, 

E.  Dickinson. 

A  few  days  later  came  another,  enclosing 
that  brilliant,  meteoric  flash  in  words,  her  *  hum- 
ming-bird,' printed  at  page  130  in  the  second 
volume  of  the  Poems  :  — 

To  the  Same 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  cannot  make  an  Indian  pipe, 
but  please  accept  a  humming-bird,  — 

A  route  of  evanescence 
With  a  revolving  wheel ; 
A  resonance  of  emerald, 
A  rush  of  cochineal ; 
And  every  blossom  on  the  bush 
Adjusts  its  tumbled  head,  — 
The  mail  from  Tunis,  probably, 
An  easy  moming*s  ride. 

When,  after  her  death,  the  great  mass  of 
Emily  Dickinson's  verses   had  been   collated 


V 


432  LETTERS  OF  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1885 

and  an  appropriate  drawing  for  the  cover  was 
desired,  there  seemed  a  peculiar  fitness  in  this 
ethereal  flower;  and  the  design  was  cut  from 
the  little  panel  which  stood  so  long  in  her 
room. 

Many  of  her  most  beautiful  verses  came  to 
me,  in  the  following  years;  and  one  autumn 
day  this :  — 

[1884.] 

How  martial  the  apology  of  nature  !  We  die,  said 
the  deathless  of  Thermopylae,  in  obedience  to  law. 

Not  sickness  stains  the  brave, 

Nor  any  dart, 
Nor  doubt  of  scenes  to  come, 

But  an  adjourning  heart. 

After  I  had  sent  her  a  painting  of  the  gor- 
geous blossoms  of  the  trumpet  vine,  which,  on 
first  seeing,  she  had  called  '  the  Soudan,'  she 
wrote :  — 

[March  21,  1885.] 

Dear  Friend,  —  Nature  forgot.  The  circus  re- 
minded her. 

Thanks  for  the  Ethiopian  face. 

The  Orient  is  in  the  west. 

*You  knew,  oh  Egypt,'  said  the  entangled  Antony. 


iSSs]  TO  MRS  TODD  433 

And  later,  — 

[September,  1885.] 

Why  should  we  censure  Othello,  when  the  crite- 
rion Lover  says,  *Thou  shalt  have  no  other  gods 
before  me '  ? 

Music  had  always  charm  for  Erflily  Dickin- 
son. Frequently,  when  I  had  been  singing, 
or  playing  upon  the  piano  at  her  request,  a 
dainty  note  would  come  in  to  me,  with  a  glass 
of  wine,  or  a  rare  rose;  in  one  instance  a 
cream  whip,  with  the  single  line,  '  Whom  He 
loveth  He  chasteneth,'  —  of  which  the  applica- 
tion might  have  been  taken  in  various  ways. 

I  can  never  forget  the  twilight  seclusion  of 
the  old  drawing-room,  the  square  piano  in  its 
corner,  the  ancient  mahogany  furniture,  and 
Emily  just  outside  the  door,  her  dress  a  spot 
of  white  in  the  dim  hall.  With  the  waning 
afternoon,  I  would  play  one  thing  and  another, 
or  sing  melodies  which  often  sounded  too  light 
and  modern  and  sunshiny  for  surroundings  so 
like  a  dreamy  corner  of  the  past.  At  first  it 
seemed  to  me  as  if  a  visitor  from  another  world 
had  alighted  for  a  time,  wishing,  for  some  in- 
scrutable reason,  to  be  entertained  on  a  foreign 
planet.  Later,  it  became  not  only  entirely 
natural,  but  so   much  a  habit  that  I  should 


434  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1886 

have  missed  my  solitary  recitals  quite  as  much 
as  my  often  invisible  auditor. 

Other  notes  to  me,  having  especial  reference 
to  particular  persons  or  occasions,  are  not  of 
sufficient  general  interest  to  be  given  here. 

As  her  unique  life  drew  toward  its  close, 
she  became,  for  the  last  two  years,  a  semi- 
invalid,  —  she  who  had  always  rejoiced  in 
strength  and  bravery  enough  for  her  own 
Aeed,  and  that  of  all  her  friends. 

Only  a  handful  of  notes  remains,  written 
during  the  final  weeks  while  Emily  brightened 
the  old  house  with  her  airy,  yet  forceful  and 
brilliant  personality,  for,  even  ill,  she  was  a 
pervasive  presence. 

Upon  the  death  of  Professor  Tuckerman, 
March  15,  1886,  she  wrote:  — 

To  Mrs  Tuckerman 

Dear  One,  — '  Eye  hath  not  seen  nor  ear  heard.* 
What  a  recompense  !  The  enthusiasm  of  God  at  the 
reception  of  His  sons  I  How  ecstatic  !  How  infinite  ! 
Says  the  blissful  voice,  not  yet  a  voice,  but  a  vision, 
*  I  will  not  let  thee  go,  except  I  bless  thee.' 

Emh^v. 

Sometime  during  this  month,  also,  she  wrote 
her  cousins :  — 


i886l  TO  MR  C.  H.  CLARK  435 


To  the  Misses 


[March,  1886.] 

I  scarcely  know  where  to  begin,  but  love  is  always 
a  safe  place.  I  have  twice  been  very  sick,  dears, 
with  a  little  recess  of  convalescence,  then  to  be 
more  sick,  and  have  lain  in  my  bed  since  Novem- 
ber, many  years,  for  me,  stirring  as  the  arbutus  does, 
a  pink  and  russet  hope ;  but  that  we  will  leave  with 
our  pillow.  When  your  dear  hearts  are  quite  con- 
venient, tell  us  of  their  contents,  the  fabric  cared  for 
most,  not  a  fondness  wanting. 

Do  you  keep  musk,  as  you  used  to,  like  Mrs 
Morene  of  Mexico?  Or  cassia  carnations  so  big 
they  split  their  fringes  of  berry?  Was  your  winter 
a  tender  shelter  —  perhaps  like  Keats's  bird,  'and 
hops  and  hops  in  little  journeys '  ? 

Are  you  reading  and  well,  and  the  W s  near 

and  warm?  When  you  see  Mrs  French  and  Dan 
give  them  a  tear  from  us. 

Vinnie  would  have  written,  but  could  not  leave 

my  side.      Maggie  gives   her  love.      Mine   more 

sweetly  still. 

Emily. 

To  Mr  C.  H.  Clark 

[April  5, 1886.] 

Dear   Friend,  —  Are  you  living  and  well,  and 

your  father  in  peace,  and  the  home  in Street 

without  effacing  change  ?    I  received  your  very  kind 


436         LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [i8S6 

message,  I  think  in  November,  since  which  I  have 
been  very  ill,  and  begin  to  roam  in  my  room  a  little, 
an  hour  at  a  time. 

Do  you,  as  time  steals  on,  know  anything  of  the 

W whom  Mr so  loved,  and  of  whom  he 

said  with  a  smile,  *  Should  he  find  a  gold  watch  in 
the  street  he  would  not  pick  it  up,  so  unsullied  was 
he'?  .  .  . 

My  sister  gives  her  faithful  remembrance  to 
yourself  and  your  father,  the  brother  so  cherished 
never  once  forgot. 

You  will  recall  the  flower  sacred  to  your  brother. 

No  sloth  has  memory. 

E.  Dickinson. 

To  Mrs  Currier 
[April  10, 1886.] 

...  Mr  Hunt  was  tinning  a  post  this  morning, 

and  told  us  L did  n*t  feel  quite  as  well  as  usual, 

and  I  have  n't  felt  quite  as  well  as  usual  since  the 
chestnuts  were  ripe,  though  it  was  n't  the  chestnuts' 
fault,  but  the  crocuses  are  so  martial  and  the  daffo- 
dils to  the  second  joint,  let  us  join  hands  and 
recover. 

'  I  do  remember  an  apothecary,'  said  that  sweeter 
robin  than  Shakespeare,  was  a  loved  paragraph 
which  has  lain  on  my  pillow  all  winter,  but  perhaps 
Shakespeare  has  been  'up  street'  oftener  than  I 
have,  this  winter. 

Would  father's  youngest  sister  believe  that  in  the 


i886]  TO  MR  C,  H.  CLARK  .  &gt;,  .      437 

*  Shire  town '  where  he  and  Blackstone  went  to 
school,  a  man  was  hung  yesterday,  for  the  murder 
of  a  man  by  the  name  of  Dickinson,  and  that  Miss 

M was  poisoned  by  a  strolHng  juggler  to  be 

tried  in  the  Supreme  Court  next  week  ? 

Don't  you  think  fumigation  ceased  when  father 
died? 

Poor,   romantic   Miss   M !     But   perhaps   a 

Police  Gazette  was  better  for  you  than  an  essay. 

I  hope  you  are  both  stronger,  and  ask  a  word  of 
gain  with  these  ecstatic  days.  I  give  my  anxious 
love,  and  Vinnie's  faithfulness  with  mine. 

Your  Emily. 

To  Mr  C.  H,  Clark 
[April  15,  1886.] 

Thank  you,  dear  friend,  I  am  better.  The  velocity 
of  the  ill,  however,  is  like  that  of  the  snail.  I  am 
glad  of  your  father's  tranquillity,  and  of  your  own 
courage.     Fear  makes  us  all  martial. 

I  could  hardly  have  thought  it  possible  that  the 
scholarly  stranger  to  whom  my  father  introduced 
me,  could  have  mentioned  my  friend,  almost  itself 
a  vision,  or  have  still  left  a  legend  to   relate  his 

name.     With  the  exception  of .  .  .  your  name 

alone  remains. 

'  Going  home/  was  he  not  an  aborigine  of  the 
sky? 

The  last  time  he  came  in  life  I  was  with  my  lilies 

VOL.  II. — 14 


438  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  [1886 

and  heliotropes.  Said  my  sister  to  me,  *  The  gentle- 
man with  the  deep  voice  wants  to  see  you,  Emily'  — 
hearing  him  ask  of  the  servant. 

'  Where  did  you  come  from  ? '  I  said,  for  he  spoke 
like  an  apparition.  'I  stepped  from  my  pulpit  to 
the  train,'  was  his  simple  reply ;  and,  when  I  asked, 
*  how  long? '  —  *  twenty  years,'  said  he,  with  inscru- 
table roguery. 

But  the  loved  voice  has  ceased;  and  to  some 
one  who  heard  him  'going  home  'it  was  sweet  to 
speak.  .  .  .  Thank  you  for  each  circumstance,  and 
tell  me  all  you  love  to  say.  .  .  . 

Excuse  me  for  the  voice,  this  moment  immortal, 

E.  Dickinson. 

This  letter,  in  her  bold,  clear,  detached  hand 
(to  an  accustomed  eye  slightly  less  firm  than 
usual),  is  the  last  one,  so  far  as  known,  which 
Emily  Dickinson  wrote.  Afterward,  she  con- 
tinued to  be  delicate,  though  hardly  alarmingly 
so;  but  just  before  the  fifteenth  of  May,  1886, 
she  sent  two  words  to  her  cousins,  freighted 
with  startling  import,  — 

Little  Cousins,  —  Called  back. 

Emily. 

Almost  immediately  she  fell  asleep,  and 
never  woke  again  to  earthly  sunshine. 


i886]  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  439 

In  the  quiet  of  leafy  Amherst,  in  the  old 
brick  mansion  behind  its  hedges  and  pines, 
she  lived  and  wrote,  and  there  she 

*  Ascended,  from  our  vision 
To  countenances  new.* 

We  can  be  only  grateful  that  she  was  moved 
to  crystallize  in  words  her  thronging  visions  of 
blossom,  and  bird,  and  *  blue,  beloved  air,'  — 
of  *  life,  death,  and  that  vast  forever  '  which  was 
her  nearest  companion. 

This  is  hardly  the  place  to  speak  in  detail  of 
Emily  Dickinson's  verses,  their  electrical  qual- 
ity, or  their  impressive  effect  upon  the  public, 
four  years  after  her  death.  They  are  pervaded 
by  a  singular  cadence  of  hidden  rhythmical 
music,  which  becomes  sympathetically  familiar 
upon  intimate  acquaintance. 

Dr  Holmes  somewhere  says  that  rhymes 
*  are  iron  fetters :  it  is  dragging  a  chain  and 
a  ball  to  march  under  their  encumbrance;' 
and  if  in  Emily  Dickinson's  work  there  is  fre- 
quently no  rhyme  where  rhyme  should  be, 
a  subtle  something,  welcome  and  satisfying, 
takes  its  place.  An  orchid  among  every-day, 
sweet-smelling  flowers,  strangeness  and  irregu- 
larity seem  but  to  enhance  her  fascination. 

A  striking  characteristic  of  her  verse  is 
its  epigrammatic  quality ;  terseness  and  vigor 


440  LETTERS  OF  ExMlLY  DICKINSON  [1886 

predominate,  rather  than  feminine  grace  and 
smoothness.  Homely  experiences  which  all 
recognize,  but  few  record,  were  to  her  texts  for 
profound  generalization.  When  the  unmean- 
ing mass  of  much  modern  poetry  is  compared 
with  Emily  Dickinson's  swift  revelations,  the 
operation  suggests  comparing  distilled  water 
with  richest  Burgundy.  And  as  such  water 
is  no  less  insipid  if  served  in  cut-glass  flagons, 
so  we  cannot  care  in  what  kind  of  bottle  has 
been  stored  for  years  the  condensed  sweet- 
ness of  tropic  suns. 

The  eighteenth  of  May,  1886,  Emily  Dickin- 
son was  carried  lovingly  over  the  threshold 
she  had  not  passed  beyond  in  years. 

*  She  went  as  softly  as  the  dew 
From  a  familiar  flower. 
Not  like  the  dew  did  she  return 
At  the  accustomed  hour.  * 

To  the  few  who  gathered,  that  sunny  after- 
noon,  her  friend,  fellow-poet,  and  'master' 
read  Emily  Bronte's  noble  Last  Lines,  with 
their  lofty  voicing  of  an  unchangeable  belief  in 
the  soul's  immortality,  —  'a  favorite,'  as  Colonel 
Higginson  so  fitly  said,  '  with  our  friend,  who 
has  now  put  on  that  Immortality  which  she 
seemed  never  to  have  laid  off.* 


i886]  LETTERS  OP  EMILY  DICKINSON  44 1 

She  had  lived  in  voluntary  retirement  from 
outside  eyes ;  and  now,  in  the  sweet  May  sun- 
shine, tender  hands  bore  her  through  meadows 
starry  with  daisies  into  a  silence  and  seclusion 
but  little  deeper. 