The Iliad or The Poem of Force SIMONE WElL The ILIAD or The Poem of Force PENDLE HILL � Wallingford Pennsylvania First edition December 1956, 5000 copies Reprinted October 1959, 3000 copies T hird Reprinting November 1964, 3000 copies Fourth Reprinting Fifth Reprinting Sixth Reprinting Seventh Reprinting Eighth Reprinting July 1967, 3000 copies January 1970, 2000 copies November 1971, 1500 copies June 1973, I ,500 copies April 1976, 3,000 copies August 1978, 2,000 copies January 1981, 2000 copies N inth Reprinting Tenth Reprinting Eleventh Reprinting October 1983, 5,000 copies Twelfth Reprinting April 1991, 3,500 copies in the summer It may thus be read event, which signal­ It was originally of the most extreme published, in the December literary The Iliad, or The Poem of Force was written and fall of 1940, after the fall of France. as in indirect on that tragic commentary ized the triumph force. donym "Emile Navis," 1941 issues The present from Homer wei:e first translated by Miss McCarthy and then checked Macdonald appeared issued of the Marseilles translation monthly, is by Mary McCarthy. in accordance in the November in pamphlet form. modern expression of pseu­ under the acrostical 1940 and January Cahiers du Sud. The quotations from the French manuscript and revised with the Greek text. "The Iliad" 1945 issue of Politics and was later by Dwight Pendle Hill is grateful sion to reprint essay. to Dwight Macdonald for his permis­ of Simone Weil's the Politics pamphlet edition OUR COVER: Achilles Killing Troilos. a red figured cup made by Euphronios and painted by Onesimos, Attic craftsmen of the early 5th century. Discov­ ered at Vulci in Etruria, this work is now in the Perugia Museum. (Drawing from Edmond Pottier's Douris fig. 18. facing p. 64.) of Greek Vases. and the Painters Books by Simone Weil: The Need for Roots, Gravity and Grace, Waiting for God and The Notebooks of Simone Weil, (G. P. Putnam, New York); Intimations among the Ancient Greeks (Beacon, Boston) of Christianity THE true hero, the true subject, the center of the by with force, away. In this as deformed it could handle, the human spirit who considered thanks to progress, to. For those dreamers as swept away, blinded, by man, force that enslaves is shown as modified by the very by the weight Iliad is force. Force employed man, force before which man's flesh shrinks work, at all times, its relations force it imagined of the force it submits that force, past, the 1/iad could appear as an historical document; others, perceive man history, the 1/iad is the purest would soon be a thing of the for are more acute and who at the very center of hu­ of mirrors. and the loveliest who is sub­ it turns man it makes a corpse out was here, and the next minute there is to it into a thing. Exercised sense: jected into a thing in the most literal of him. Somebody nobody here at all; this us: of showing whose powers of recognition is that x that turns anybody today as yesterday, the 1/iad never wearies To define force-it to the limit, is a spectacle force, . . . the horses Rattled the empty chariots Longing for their noble drivers. Lay, dearer to the vultures through the files of battle, But they on the ground than to their wives. The hero becomes dust: a thing dragged behind a chariot in the All around, his black hair in the dust his whole head lay, Was spread; That once-charming Defile it on his native soil. head; now Zeus had let his enemies 3 The bitterness undiluted. prospect out halo of patriotism No comforting of immortality; descends. of such a spectacle is offered us absolutely fiction intervenes; no consoling and on the hero's head no washed­ His soul, fleeing his limbs, passed to Hades, Mourning its fate, forsaking its youth and its vigor. painful is the contrast-is more poignant-so Still world: the far­ as quickly evocation, the away, precarious, of the family, world in which each man counts more than anything else to those about him. rubbed out, of another world of peace, touching the sudden maids in the palace She ordered her bright-haired To place on the fire a large tripod, A hot bath for Hector, returning Foolish Slain by grey-eyed woman! Already he lay, far from hot baths, arm. Athena, who guided Achilles' preparing from battle. Far from hot baths he was indeed, alone. Nearly all the lliad takes place Nearly all of human life, hot baths. then and now, takes place far from poor man. And not he far from hot baths. Here we see force in its grossest and most summary form­ in its processes, i.e., kill, it will possibly and ready, How much more varied in its effects the is the other force, that does not kill just yet. It will kill, or perhaps the force that kills. how much more surprising force that does not kill, surely poised any moment, which is to say at every moment. In whatever its effect is the same: it turns a man into a stone. aspect, From its first property to turn a human being into a thing by the simple method of killing quite prodigious human being into a thing while he is still too in its own way, the ability to turn a he it merely hangs, it can kill, over the head of the creature him) flows another, (the ability He is alive; alive. at 4 entity house it finds itself this An extraordinary has a soul; and yet-he is a thing. -a thing that has a soul. And as for the soul, what an extra­ ordinary in! Who can say what it costs it, moment by moment, how much writhing required does so, under pressure ment of its nature A man stands to this residence, are and pleating a thing; if it there is not a single ele­ is not done. to accommodate and bending, of it? It was not made to live inside and naked with a weapon pointing itself folding of necessity, to which violence disarmed at him; this person becomes thing touches hoping: or any­ acting, him. Just a minute ago, he was thinking, a corpse before anybody he pondered. And the other drew near, anxious to touch his knees, hoping in his heart Motionless, Terrified, To escape evil death and black destiny With one hand he clasped, While the other clung to the sharp spear, not letting suppliant, his knees, . .. go . . . Soon, however, pointing he is simply matter; he grasps the fact that the weapon which is at him will not be diverted; and now, still breathing, still thinking, he can think no longer: son of Priam Thus spoke the brilliant In begging words. But he heard a harsh reply: He spoke. And the other's Dropping Achilles, Through the neck and breastbone. Sunk home its full length. Lay still, The other, face down, and the black blood ran out, wetting his spear, he knelt down, holding drawing his sharp sword, struck knees and heart failed him. The two-edged sword out his arms. the ground. 5 IF a stranger, throws himself completely disabled, on the mercy of a warrior, disarmed, on the warrior's In any case, his flesh has lost that very important distinguishes If you give a frog's he is to death; but a moment of him of part will suffice to relieve pro­ strengthless, not, by this very act, condemned impatience his life. perty which in the laboratory dead-the response. galvanic electric shock, with the touch or sight of something horrible this bundle of muscles, Alone of all living things, neither As his lips advance most charged things cannot: teeth-they He has lost the right to do so. that is for him of all they do not draw back on his to touch the object with horror, nerves, the suppliant flesh from leg an or terrifying, twitches. we have just described and flesh likewise If you confront nor trembles. it twitches. a human being quivers living No one saw great Priam enter. He stopped, Clasped the knees of Achilles, Those terrible man-killing kissed his hands, hands that had slaughtered so many of his sons. The sight of a human being pushed to such an extreme suffering chills us like the sight of a dead body: of strikes a man, and arrives As when harsh misfortune He has killed The door of a rich man; a shudder seizes So Achilles shuddered The others shuddered to see divine Priam; too, looking one at the other. at last at someone else's see him. those who a man if in his own country door, But this feeling of the suffering lasts only a moment. Soon the very presence creature is forgotten: He spoke. The other, remembering his own father, longed to weep; Taking the old man's arm, he pushed him away. 6 of Hector, Both were remembering. Priam wept, abased at the feet of Achilles. But Achilles Now for Patroclus. wept, now for his father, And their sobs resounded Thinking killer of men, through the house. an inert object. Anybody who his own old father, his knees, move­ of his being with a single modifying as if, clasping words, recalling It was merely a question power over us by his very exercises a certain that is, the to him alone, and a power that belongs each movement repressing, that out. If we step aside for a passer-by on the aside to avoid a bill­ It was not insensibility that made Achilles ment of his hand push away the old man who had been cling­ ing to his knees; Priam's had moved him to tears. as free in his attitudes and movements there were not a suppliant but is in our vicinity presence, power of halting, our body sketches road, it is not the same thing as stepping board; alone in our rooms, we get up, walk about, sit down from the way we do when we have a again quite differently visitor. of by men whom another a moment of impatience fore even thought their presence, people they, on their side, running nothing in a single instant, persons. Pushed, unless chance gives somebody But supposing again. to up, honored take this resurrection seriously; a wish they dare not express lest an irritated on them. In move about as if they were not there; the risk of being reduced nothingness they lie where they are, But this indefinable human being has on us is not exercised imitate they fall. Fallen, that at long last they have been picked do not venture still has a chance to pass sentence to in their own remarks, they the idea of raising that the presence them forever with cordial can deprive voice return influence who can die be­ to silence of life, them up : He spoke; the old man trembled and obeyed. 7 no room in them for any impulse of their own. that their life is harder than other men's nor that they is answered, once his prayer like everybody creatures Their days hold no pastimes, else. But there who have become AT least a suppliant, a human being again, for the rest of their lives. becomes are other, more unfortunate things no free spaces, It is not occupy a lower place in the social human species, another corpse. The idea of a person's tradiction. life, shreds. woman, and never achieving death strung life that death congeals and the contradiction This thing is constantly before Yet what is impossible hierarchy; no, they are a man and a a compromise between being a thing is a logical con­ in logic becomes true in it to lodged within aspiring the soul tears to be a man or a out over a whole lifetime; it-here, surely, here, surely is death but but is life, abolishing. This strange fate awaits the virgin, the priest's daughter: I will not give her up. Sooner shall old age come upon her In our house in Argos, far from her native land, Tending the loom and sharing my bed. It awaits the young wife, the young mother, the prince's bride: And perhaps one day, in Argos, you will weave cloth for another, And the Messeian Much against or Hyperian your will, yielding water you will fetch, to a harsh necessity. It awaits the baby, heir to the royal scepter: Soon they will be carried I with them. And you, my child, will either go with me, To a land where you will work at wretched Laboring off in the hollow ships, for a pitiless master . . . . tasks, In the mother's eyes, such a fate is, for her child, as terrible 8 against would rather the army that subjects die than see his wife re­ of heaven are invoked the husband as death; duced to it; all the plagues father the victims themselves are beyond all this. Curses, reflections comparisons, rebellion, are obliterated itself barely the slave's from the mind of the captive; privilege. on. Fidelity his daughter on the future lingers to his city and his dead is not by the to it. Yet of feelings and the past, and memory of his master, despoiler, And what does it take to make the slave weep? The mis­ of the fortune his oppressor, man who laid waste his town and killed his very eye .... This man suffers or dies; then the slave's come. And really on which tears are permitted, will always cry whenever situation pillager, his dear ones under tears keeps tears on tap for him. why not? This is for him the only occasion are, indeed, required. A slave he can do so with impunity-his She spoke, weeping, Using the pretext and the women groaned, of Patroclus to bewail their own torments. of his life, to express has no license just as, with the horse in harness, it follows him a little, Since the slave to his master, except anything that the only emotion what is pleasing that can touch or enliven that can reach him in the desolation of love for his master. is the emotion There is no place else to send the gift of love; all other outlets are barred, bar every way but one. breast a hope is born, the hope of becoming, through someone once again, won't these captives though these emotions should, considering for them: some day, how far even somebody's influence, And if, by some miracle, are addressed to the very men who reek with horror the very recent bit, shafts, in the slave's go to show love and thankfulness, past, still reins My husband, to whom my father and respected mother gave me, 9 with me, of a single mother, by the sharp bronze. I saw before the city transfixed My three brothers, children, So dear to mel They all met their fatal day. But you did not allow me to weep, when swift Achilles Slaughtered You promised For his legitimate my husband and laid waste the city of Mynes. wife, that he would carry me away in his me that I would be taken by divine Achilles, ships, To Pythia, where our marriage among would be celebrated the Myrmidons, So without respite been gentle. I mourn for you, you who have always To lose more than the slave does is impossible, of it he may get back if he fate, but this is his only of changing his A fragment his whole inner life. sees the possibility hope. Such is the empire of force, of nature. erase the whole inner life, Nature, can too, when vital needs are at stake, even the grief of a mother: as extensive as the empire for he loses But the thought of eating came to her, when she was tired of tears. FORCE, in the hands of another, that extreme hunger does; for it the power of life and death. Its the soul the same tyranny possesses, and in perpetuo, rule, moreover, The man who knows himself weaker alone in the heart of a city than a man lost in the desert. than another is as cold and hard as the rule of inert matter. exercises is more over Two casks are placed before Zeus's doorsill, Containing the other . . . the gifts he gives, the bad in one, the good in 1 0 The man to whom he gives baneful gifts, he exposes to outrage; A frightful He is a wanderer, need drives across the divine earth;· and gets no respect from gods or men. he the first it it. The hu­ Force is as pitiless to the man who possesses it, or thinks The truth is, nobody really possesses up, in the Iliad, into conquered per­ on the one hand, and conquerors suppliants, the second it crushes, does, as it is to its victims; intoxicates. man race is not divided sons, slaves, chiefs who does not at one time or another force. The common soldier right to bear arms; nevertheless of orders and In this poem there is not a single man have to bow his neck to the Iliad is free and has he is subject on the other. and abuse: in the to the indignity he came upon a commoner shouting out, But whenever He struck him with his scepter "Good for nothing! You are weak and cowardly You count for nothing, neither and spoke sharply: Be still and listen to your betters, and unwarlike, in battle nor in council." Thersites he makes, comments those made by Achilles: pays dear for the perfectly reasonable not at all different, comments from moreover, on back and shoulders, He hit him with his scepter So that he doubled over, and a great tear welled up, And a bloody welt appeared Under the golden scepter. Wiping away his tears, bewildered Troubled Frightened, and in pain. on his back he sat down, though they were, the others laughed long at him. himself, is shown that proud hero, the undefeated, Achilles us at the outset woman he wanted for his bride has been helpless taken from under his nose, and he has not dared to oppose it: of the poem, weeping grief-the with humiliation and 1 1 . . . But Achilles Weeping, By the white-capped sat apart from his companions, waves, staring over the boundless ocean. What has happened humiliated Achilles, is that Agamemnon has deliberately to show that he himself is the master: ... So you will learn That I am greater To treat me as an equal and set himself me. against than you, and anyone else will hesitate But a few days pass and now the supreme weeping and have, moreover, is in his turn. He must humble himself, commander he must plead, the added misery of doing it all in vain. In the same way, there is not a single batants who is spared the shameful heroes quake like everybody else. from Hector tion--except happen to be present: It only needs a challenge to throw the whole Greek force into consterna­ for Achilles one of the com­ of fear. The and his men, and they did not experience He spoke and all grew still and held their peace, Ashamed to refuse, afraid to accept. But once Ajax comes forward changes sides: and offers himself, fear quickly A shudder of terror ran through the Trojans, making their limbs weak; And Hector himself felt his heart leap in his breast. But he no longer had the right to tremble, or to run away . .. . Two days later, it is Ajax's turn to be terrified: Zeus the father on high, makes fear rise in Ajax. He stops, overcome, puts behind him his buckler made of seven hides, Trembles, looks at the crowd around, like a wild beast . . . . 1 2 Even to Achilles stammer him, not a man. But, with the exception in the /laid tastes a matter of valor than of blind destiny, in the poem by Zeus's the moment comes; he too must shake and with fear, though it is a river that has this effect on every man in battle. Victory which is symbolized a moment of defeat golden scales: of Achilles, is less Then Zeus the father took his golden scales, In them he put the two fates of death that cuts down all men, One for the Trojans, tamers of horses, one for the Greeks. bronze-sheathed He seized the scales by the middle; it was the fatal day of Greece that sank. destiny By its very blindness, Blind also is she who decrees He that takes the sword, will perish formulated almost the same terms: the principle establishes a kind of justice. to warriors punishment in kind. by the sword. The Iliad long before the Gospels did, and in Ares is just, and kills those who kill. PERHAPS all men, by the very act of being born, that they are, as a matter yet this is a truth to which cir­ shuts men's eyes. The strong to suffer violence; strong, is aware of this. of fact, nor are the weak absolutely weak, They have in common a refusal to are destined cumstance never absolutely but neither believe see no relation versa. through a non-resistant element; surrounds him nothing has the impulse the weak and vice of force seems to walk that between the power to interpose, both belong to the same species: and the strong, themselves The man who is the possessor and the act, the tiny interval in the human substance between that is reflection. 13 We see his corpse cut the throats for there is none either of their deeds will at length as we cut flowers for a grave. power, have no suspicion we see men in arms behaving or prudence. Hence and madly. We see their sword bury itself to him the outrages of twelve as naturally of the fact that come home to too will bow the neck in their turn. If you can obey, with a single word tremble, of why should it occur to you that the curses in the breast at enemy who is in the very act of pleading over a dying man by will endure. Trojan boys on the funeral Where there is no room for reflection, justice harshly of a disarmed their knees. We see them triumph describing Achilles pyre of Patroclus These men, wielding the consequences them-they make an old man fall silent, of your own, this old man, who is after all a priest, portance taking Achilles' he nor she can do anything over the sight of the Greeks fleeing in misery and confusion. What could possibly last exactly indicates death, of his own? Thus it happens those who have force on loan from fate count on it too much and are destroyed. gods' eyes? Why should you refrain from girl away from him if you know that neither it, that this very rout will be the cause of his friend's as long as he wants it to and end when his mood to him that this rout, which will but obey you? Achilles and, for that matter, will have their own im­ rejoices suggest in the that quantity; nor do they see their But at the time their own destruction seems impossible them. For they do not see that the force in their possession only a limited other human beings as a kind of balance between amounts movements all our consideration clude that destiny none at all to their inferiors. of the force measure of hesitation, wherein they con­ in humanity, to them, and And at this point they exceed the Since other people do not impose on their lies to is with unequal for our brothers has given complete that halt, that interval at their disposal. that is actually relations of force. license In- 14 they exceed it, since they are not aware that it is evitably And now we see them committed to irretrievably limited. suddenly things chance; chance is kind to them, sometimes they are, exposed, power that formerly stands shield, But in any case there gone is the armor of no cease to obey them. Sometimes open to misfortune; their naked souls; them and tears. protected nothing, between cruel. to penalize to Socrates it functions which was the of Greek thought. automatically as the mainspring This retribution, it was the jumping-off To the Pythagoreans, we find the idea of it familiar. which has a geometrical rigor, the abuse of force, It is the soul of the epic. Under of and upon the point of speculation has coun­ In Oriental operates main subject the name of Nemesis, Aeschylus's tragedies. Plato, nature of man and the universe. Wherever Hellenism penetrated, tries which are steeped idea that bas lived on under the name of Kharma. The Occi­ dent, however, express ure, equilibrium, life are, in the West, restricted vocabulary of technics. the Greeks were, first of all, geometricians ship to virtue. has lost it, and no longer even has a word to of limit, meas­ the conduct of in the function of matter; We are only geometricians it in any of its languages: which ought to determine in their apprentice­ conceptions in Buddhism, to a servile it is perhaps this Greek THE progress game of seesaw. invincible, a continual himself experienced may have thing. transitory scribed even though, defeat; he forgets At the end of the first day of combat de­ to treat victory as a in the Iliad, the victorious Greeks were in a position of the war in the Iliad is simply of the moment feels only a few hours before, The victor he 15 of all their efforts, to obtain the object riches-assuming had reason to believe Egyptian priests, to Herodotus the Greeks are no longer of course as Homer did, that the Greeks that Helen was in Troy. Actually, the who ought to have known, affirmed later on that she was in Egypt. In any case, that evening interested i.e., Helen and her in her or her possessions: let us not accept the riches of Paris; "For the present, Nor Helen; everybody That Troy stands on the verge of ruin." him. He spoke, and all the Achaeans acclaimed sees, even the most ignorant, of Troy; for their bonfires, for slaves, What they want is, in fact, everything. For booty, all the riches houses; all the men. They forget that everything is not within their power, for they are not in Troy. Perhaps perhaps will be there tomorrow; makes the same mistake: all the women and children; they the same day, all the palaces, not. Hector, one detail, temples, for corpses, and in my hearts, For I know well in my entrails A day will come when Holy Troy will perish, And Priam, and the nation of. Priam of the good lance. But I think less of the grief that is in store for the Trojans, And of Hecuba herself, And of my brothers, Who will fall in the dust under the blows of the enemy, Than of you that day when a Greek in his bronze breastplate Will drag you away weeping and deprive and of Priam the king, so numerous and so brave, you of your liberty. But as for me, may I be dead, and may the earth have covered me Before I hear you cry out or see you dragged away! At this moment what would he not give to turn aside those But at this moment to be inevitable? which he believes horrors 1 6 he could give would be of any use. The next day but nothing one, however, Agamemnon himself And now Hector, readily unwilling secure the enemy's the Greeks have run away miserably, to the sea again. is in favor of putting and by making a very few concessions, could to let them go empty-handed: departure; yet now he is even and let the brightness Greeks, sail over the broad back of ocean ... Set fires everywhere Lest in the night the long-haired Escaping, Let each of them take home a wound to heal ... thus others will fear To bring dolorous war to the Trojans, mount the skies tamers of horses. His wish is granted; reduce Hector the Greeks stay; and the next day they and his men to a pitiable condition: As for them-they fled across the plain like cattle Whom a lion hunts before him in the dark midnight Thus the mighty Agamemnon, Steadily son of Atreus, and still they fled. the hindmost; killing . . . pursued them, Hector regains In the course of the afternoon, again, by Patroclus, ancy, withdraws repulsed Patroclus, exposed, And finally that evening counsel prudent pressing wounded and without then puts the Greeks to flight, who has come in with his fresh troops. ends by finding himself armor, to the sword of Hector. his advantage, of Polydamas and repudiates it sharply: the victorious Hector hears the the ascend­ then is Now that wily Kronos's Glory at the ships; now that I have driven the Greeks to son has given me the sea, Do not offer, fool, such counsels No Trojan will listen So Hector spoke, and the Trojans acclaimed to you,· nor would I permit it . . . to the people. him .. . 17 has harried him across of the two in combat; The next day Hector is lost. Achilles the field and is abot!t to kill him. stronger after several against the walls of Troy, absolutely and to steady an exhausted his soul to face it: enemy? And Hector stands alone, weeks of rest, ardent for vengeance been the He has always how much the more so now, alone to wait for death and victory, before alone, at once would heap dishonor through my recklessness Alas, were I to slip through the gate, behind the rampart, Polydamas And now that my people, I fear the Trojans I fear to hear from some one far less brave than 1: "Hector, on me ... I have destroyed and the long-robed too far, has ruined his his own strength Trojan women, trusting people." ... my spear against the wall, and, leaning Suppose I were to down my bossed shield, My massive helmet, Should go to meet renowned Achilles? But why spin out these fancies? I would not reach him, nor would he pity me, me. He would kill me like a woman Or respect If I came naked thus ... ... Why such dreams? Not a jot of the grief and ignominy Alone, stripped is Hector spared. discovers shelter that fall to the unfortunate of the prestige that kept him from taking to the of the walls is not enough to save him from flight: that the courage of force, he Seeing him, Hector began to tremble. To stay ... . . . It i s not for a ewe nor the skin of an ox, That they are striving, not these ordinary rewards of the He had not the heart race,· It is for a life horses. that they run, the life of Hector, tamer of 1 8 Wounded to death, vain supplications: he enhances by his conqueror's triumph I implore you, by your soul, by your knees, .... by your parents of the Iliad knew that the death of Hector But the auditors would be but a brief joy to Achilles, but a brief joy to the Trojans, a brief joy to the Achaeans. and the death of Achilles of Troy but and the destruction THUS violence It comes to seem just as external as to And from this springs the idea of a destiny obliterates anybody who feels its to its employer touch. its victim. which executioner which conquered distress. and vice versa: The conquered and victim stand and conqueror brings equally innocent, in the same are brothers misfortune to the conqueror, before before A single son, short-lived, Neglected I camp before Troy, injuring by me, he grows old-for far from home you and your sons. was born to him. which alone would enable man in its machinery, would require which is as rare as dignity in weakness. is not without since of at least three quarters its perils, upon that marvelous indifference virtue, A moderate moderation use of force, to escape being enmeshed superhuman Moreover, prestige, its strength, that the strong tagious that it infects excess it. Yet ordinarily itself from which force derives rests principally feel toward the weak, an indifference the very people who are the objects prudence so con­ of or is not arrived at through 19 On the contrary, considerations. temptation. politic to an irresistible ally heard in the mouths of the characters sites' are reasonable speeches of the angry Achilles: to the highest speeches in the Iliad. Ther­ degree; so are the man dashes to it as The voice of reason is occasion­ Nothing is worth my life, not all the goods They say the well-built A man can capture But, once gone, the soul cannot be captured steers and fatted sheep city of Ilium contains. back. he is punished But words of reason drop into the void. If they come from and shuts up; if from a chief, his else, there is everything In the betray them. And failing an inferior, actions always a god handy to advise end, the very idea of wanting lotted from the mind: one-the business him to be unreasonable. to escape the role fate has al­ of killing and dying-disappears We to whom Zeus Has assigned Suffering suffering, from youth to old age, in grievous wars, till we perish to the last man. Already themselves to be "condemned men." these warriors, like Craonne's so much later, felt IT was the simplest At the outset, trap that pitched at the embarkation, always are if you have a large force on but space to oppose you. Their weap­ this situation. are light, as hearts your side and nothing ons are in their hands; the enemy is absent. has been conquered Unless your spirit of the en- by the reputation them into their hearts in advance 20 emy, you always feel yourself body who is not there. yoke of necessity. sity yet presents a game, as though on holiday life. itself; To the spirits to be much stronger than any­ An absent man does not impose the of those embarking no neces­ consequently they go off as though to from the confinement of daily Where have they gone, those braggadocio We proudly flung upon the air at Lemnos, Stuffing ourselves Drinking As for Trojans-a Could handle in battle. from cups brimming over with wine? hundred or two each man of us with flesh of horned steers, boasts And now one is too much for us. of war does not immediately destroy will not submit to it so long in long days empty of necessity, war is a game. War's necessity in kind from the necessity of peace. So ter­ is terrible, al­ escape; But the first contact the illusion that together different rible is it that the human spirit as it can possibly refuge days arbitrary tion; the lives you destroy quite as incapable ture and smirched true if a momentary divine and basely, coarsely hand that wards off defeat and unreal. loved. But with the majority and whenever it can escape it takes days of play, of revery, an abstrac­ and are like toys broken by a child, ges­ Danger then becomes of feeling; heroism with boastfulness. of vitality access is but a theatrical This becomes doubly comes to reinforce and death. the Then war is easy of the combatants this state of mind comrades in the hand of necessity. Soon there comes a day when fear, or defeat, spirit, does not persist. or the death of beloved and it crumbles is no more a game or a dream; now at last the warrior doubt the reality which he And this reality, perceives, death. Once you acknowledge is hard, much too hard to be borne, for it enfolds death to be a practical of its existence. the warrior's At that moment war touches cannot pos- 21 travel between the future is different yet for those whose the experience death is the future, may grow old in battles; face. The mind is then strung for assigns and days piled on days make years. the thought True enough, have bent under the yoke of war, the relation than for as a limit set in advance except in of it becomes unendurable, all men are fated to die; true enough other men. For other on the future; his profession is abhor­ of war makes visible the of death that lies locked up in each moment, our from one day to the next without meet­ up to a pitch it can sibility, flashes. also, a soldier spirits death and the future men death appears the soldier him. Yet the idea of man's having death for a future rent to nature. Once possibility thoughts cannot ing death's stand for only a short time; but each new dawn reintroduces the same necessity; On Regularly, each one of these days the soul suffers violence. for every morning, meeting death thought or of purpose on the way. Thus war effaces all conceptions even its own "war aims." It effaces the very goal, including a situ­ notion to be inside ation so violent its end. Consequently, nobody it is to be unable to conceive to bring this end about. In the presence of an does anything armed enemy, what hand can relinquish its weapon? The mind ought to find a way out, but the mind has lost all capa­ city to so much as look outward. sorbed in doing itself violence. war or slavery as it were, by the force of their own specific look to the outsider they continue because resources sufferings and so gravity, to bear; actually, as though they were easy of the the sufferer whether continue, is in question, intolerable they have deprived which might serve to extricate the soul castrates through as this is to find it inconceivable; itself time without The mind is completely ab­ to an end. To be outside of war's being brought Always in human life, of aspiration, cannot journey Nevertheless, him. to war cries out for the soul that is enslaved to it in an extreme appears itself but deliverance deliverance, 22 aspect, the aspect of destruction. more reasonable and tragic tion, more moderate, expose the mind to suffering not be borne, even as memory. Terror, slaughter, these things toxication idea that an unlimited profit or no profit at all is terribly should not continually of force had not intervened so naked, so violent grief, of comrades-is the annihilation Any other solu­ in character, would that it could exhaustion, that it credible tear at the soul, if the in­ to drown them? The effort should bring in only a limited painful. What? Will we let Priam and the Trojans boast Of Argive Helen, she for whom so many Greeks Died before Troy, far from their native land? What? Do you want us to leave the city, wide-streeted Troy, Standing, when we have suffered so much for it? Troy and Helen are in reality what is Helen to Ulysses? that will not compensate What indeed is Troy, ruin? him for Ithaca's But actually full of riches For the Greeks, of blood and tears; ories. itself can imagine the death of dearly emulation, If the existence the thing nature is the destruction loved comrades in death: a rivalry to master them is to master frightful of an enemy has made a soul destroy put there, then the only remedy the soul of the enemy. At the same time in arouses a spirit of somber mere sources mem­ my dead friend, May I die, then, at once! Since fate has not let me Protect Perished, So now I go to seek the murderer Hector. Zeus wills it-Zeus and the other immortal. And death shall I find at the moment who far from home of my friend, longing for me to defend him from death. It is the same despair one hand, and slaughter that drives on the other: him on toward death, on the 23 I know it well, my fate is to perish here, Far from father and dearly loved mother; but meanwhile I shall not stop till the Trojans have had their fill of war. The man possessed long as he has not become something race from the race of the living. ferent by this twofold need for death belongs, so to a dif­ different, still What echo can the timid hopes of life strike sight How can it hear the defeated begging life has already by a single, heart? been re­ of the light of day? The threatened simple dis­ of nearly all its consequence lieved a weapon. its adversary tinction: Furthermore, how can a man who has rooted out of himself the notion that the light of day is sweet to the eyes respect such a notion when it makes its appearance humble lament? it is now unarmed; in some futile possesses and in such a for another I clasp tight your knees, Achilles. Have a thought, have pity for me. to be respected. bread, vineyard you caught me I stand here, 0 son of Zeus, a suppliant, In your house it was I first tasted Demeter's That day in my well-pruned And sold me, sending me far from father and friends, To holy Lemnos; a hundred oxen was my price. And now I will pay you three hundred for ransom. This dawn is for me my twelfth After so many sorrows. Through some evil fate. Zeus surely must hate me Who again puts me into your hands. Alas, my poor day in Troy, See me here, in your hands, mother, Laothoe, Daughter son you of the old man, Altes-a short-lived have borne. What a reception this feeble hope gets! 24 you too must die. Why make a fuss about it? he too has died-a far better man than you are. Come, friend, Patroclus, Don't you see how handsome I am, how mighty? A noble father begat me, and I have a goddess for mother. Yet even I, like you, must some day encounter Whether the hour strikes at noon, or evening, The hour that comes when some arms-bearing my fate, or sunrise, warrior will kill me. else when you have had to cas­ of all yearning for it demands a truly heart­ of the powers of generosity. It is impossible being capable of such an who dwells, of the poem-! mean Patroclus, in a peculiar who exertion warriors any of Homer's life in somebody it is that warrior To respect trate yourself breaking to imagine unless exertion, way, at the very center "knew hew to be sweet to everybody," the Iliad commits men do we know, in several who would have displayed three?�ven soldier conquering war, he, like of doing so is different--over as over matter itself. ence its inevitable thousand such god-like Lacking is like a scourge becomes this is doubtful. no cruel or brutal the slave, effects: a thing, of nature. Possessed though his manner are as powerless him too, words And both, at the touch of force, experi­ they become deaf and dumb. and who throughout act. But then how many years of human history, generosity? this generosity, Two or the by SucH is the nature of force. Its power of con­ a man into a thing is a double one, and in its applica­ verting tion double-edged. fashions, to stone. those who use it and those who endure it are turned This property of force achieves its maximum eflec- To the same degree, though in different 25 the man either of these fac­ when the tide of by men deprived and everything to the level of inert matter, or to the level of blind force, a transformation, who wins or loses a battle; on the resolution taken, are fought and decided men who have undergone during the clash of arms, in battle, toward a deci­ is rushing man, the man of strategy, tiveness the day has turned, sion. It is not the planning acting battles ulties, dropped sivity, Herein lies the last secret in its similes, wind, wild beasts, or else to frightened animals, in nature that is set into motion by the violence forces. times even from one hour to the next, experience, turn about, one or the other of these transmutations: by the Iliad to fire, flood, which liken the warriors from one day to the next, some­ turn and which is pure pas­ which is pure momentum. sand, to anything of external or God knows what blind cause of disaster, revealed either Greeks and Trojans, of war, a secret who have water, trees, As when a lion, murderous, Which by thousands among the cattle are grazing over some vast marshy springs field. . . . And their flanks heave with terror; Scattered father. in panic before Hector and Zeus, the great even so the Achaians fire breaks out deep in a bushy wood As when a ravening And the wheeling And trees, So Atreus' son, Agamemnon, roared through the ranks Of the Trojans in flight . . . . sparks far and wide, root and branch, topple over in flames,· wind scatters and its equipment, The art of war is simply the art of producing mations, it inflicts on the enemy, are only means directed end-its mations true object are always a mystery; is the warrior's such transfor­ even the casualties toward this the gods are their authors, soul. Yet these transfor­ its processes, the 26 men's imagination. gods who kindle petrifactive quality its nature; will not escape this except by a miracle. rare and of brief duration. two-fold and a soul which has entered this caused, to of force the province are Such miracles But however always, of force, is essential moments, scattered celestial of uniform of the soldier of the conqueror to be so, the despair slaughter-all the poem, those brief, the obliteration in the Iliad to make a picture THE wantonness for any creature these elements of horror, would desolation that knows no or thing that is at its mercy or is him that drives of the slave or the con­ respect imagined on to destruction, quered man, the wholesale combine which force is the sole hero. A monotonous result were it not for those few luminous here and there throughout moments in which man possesses awakes then, to live for an instant once in force's tains no ambiguities, room for anything the course meets it, like Hector before Troy, as he tries to face destiny on his own terms, without times, -and there is hardly ity of which the Iliad does not treat. several pitality the blindness awakes pure and whole; it con­ it has no and love. Sometimes it is in that a man finds his soul: he any form of pure love known to human­ The tradition generations, the help of gods or men. At other their souls but courage of inner deliberations his soul. The soul that only and be lost almost at it is in a moment of love that men discover nothing complicated vast kingdom, even through persists, or turbid; of combat. to dispel of hos­ 27 Thus I am for you a beloved Let us turn our lances away from each other, even in battle. guest in the breast of Argos . .. The love of the son for the parents, mother for son, is continually described, touching for son, of in a manner as as it is curt: of father Thetis answered, "You were born to me for a short life, my child, as you shedding tears, say . .. " love: Even brotherly My three brothers So dear . . . . whom the same mother bore for me, is of an astonishing to sorrow, Imaging the humiliations wife, the husband love, condemned Conjugal purity. beloved even in anticipation could be simpler man about to die? passes which over the one indignity What than the words spoken by his wife to the would stain their tenderness. of slavery which await a Better for me . . . Losing you, to go under the earth. No other comfort Will remain, when you have encountered your death-heavy fate, Only grief, only sorrow . .. . Not less touching are the words expressed to a dead husband: and left me your widow Our child is still tiny, you died young, Dear husband, Alone in the palace. The child you and I, crossed I think he will never grow up . . . For not in your bed did you die, holding And speaking Night and day, as I weep, might live in my memory. to me prudent words which forever by fate, had together. my hand 28 The most beautiful comrades-at-arms, friendship is the final theme of The Epic: of all, the friendship between . . . But Achilles Wept, dreaming of the beloved comrade; sleep, all­ prevailing, Would not take him; he turned over again and again. of love, the crowning grace of war, is triumph that floods the hearts son or a murdered But the purest the friendship it a murdered for vengeance. tance between vanquished, shrinks to nothing: Before it--even more miraculous-the benefactor and suppliant, no longer cries out dis­ and victor between of mortal enemies. Before friend and hunger had been appeased, Priam fell to admiring But when thirst Then Dardanian How tall he was, and handsome; And in his turn Dardanian Who watched his handsome face and listened And when they were satisfied he had the face of a god; Priam was admired by Achilles, of each with contemplation Achilles. to his words. other . . . These moments of grace are rare in the Iliad, but they are enough to make us feel with sharp regret what it is that vio­ lence has killed and will kill again. HowEVER, such a heaping-up deeds were it not for the note of incur­ of violent effect, would have a frigid able bitterness often only a single of the verse, stroke is absolutely that continually makes itself word marks its presence, heard, though often a mere or a run-on line. It is in this that the Iliad from that proceeds in this bitterness unique, 29 and love, which have hardly any place in this study bathe acts of violence, and of unjust nevertheless Never does the tone lose its coloring over the whole human race, im­ of drop into lamentation. as sunlight. and that spreads yet never does the bitterness except as a kind of accent. tenderness partial bitterness; Justice of extremes the work in their light without themselves, scorned, whether is laid bare without happiness man is set above or below the condition whatever are brought seen as counterparts there is any difference, possibly is destroyed equally is regretted. more sharply felt. ever becoming Nothing or not death is its destiny; noticeable precious is un­ everyone's no or disdain; dissimulation common to all men; Victors and vanquished near us; under the same head, both are as well. If of the poet, and the listener are misfortunes it is that the enemy's So he fell there, put to sleep in the sleep of bronze, Unhappy man, far from his wife, defending his own people . .. . And what accents sold at echo the fate of the lad Achilles Lemnos! Eleven days he rejoiced his heart among those he loved, Returning God delivered To him who had to send him, unwilling, him into the hands of Achilles, to Hades. from Lemnos; the twelfth day, once more, And the fate of Euphorbus, who saw only a single day of war. Blood soaked his hair, the hair like to the Graces' When Hector is lamented: . . . guardian of chaste wives and little children. In these few words, chastity appears, dirtied and by force, 30 delivered childhood, of Troy becomes runs by, seeking to elude his doom: an object to the sword. The fountain nostalgia at the gates when Hector of poignant Close by there stood the great stone tanks, Handsomely Were washed clean by Troy's lovely daughters built, where silk-gleaming and garments housewives In the old days of peace, long ago, when the Greeks had not come. Past these did they run their race, pursued and pursuer. The whole of the Iliad lies under the shadow of the greatest calamity of the human race can experience-the destruction a city. This calamity poet been born in Troy. But the tone is not different far from home. Achaeans Insofar could not tear more at the heart had the when the are dying, as this other life, seems calm the life of the living, of the world of peace are felt as the brief evocations and full, pain: With the break of dawn and the rising of the day, On both sides arrows flew, men fell. But at the very hour that the woodcutter goes home to fix his meal In the mountain valleys when his arms have had enough Of hacking great trees, And the desire for sweet food seizes his entrails, At that hour, by their valor, the Danaans broke the rises in his heart, and disgust front. is not war, whatever Whatever Iliad wraps in poetry; veils the step from life to death: the realities war destroys of war, never. the No reticence or threatens, 31 Then his teeth flew out; from two sides, Blood came to his eyes; the blood that from lips and nostrils He was spilling, in its black cloud. open-mouthed; death enveloped him of the deeds of war is left undisguised; or hated. lot of fate and the gods decide the changing are admired, scorned, authority nor vanquished Within the limits fixed The cold brutality neither victors Almost always, battle. sovereign provoke ever blocking peace; motives, caprice and malice. vanquished, things regret can inspire that men are capable those comparison neither those fits of madness, war is their true business; As for the warriors, or s which liken them to beasts or but only nor contempt, their only victors admiration of being so transformed. by fate, the gods determine with victory and defeat. It is always they who which are for­ those treacheries, THERE may be, unknown to us, other expres­ sense of equity which breathes One is it has not been imitated. The aware that the poet is a Greek and not a Trojan. of its clue to the origin a direct portions; the Iliad; certainly sions of the extraordinary through barely tone of the poem furnishes oldest perhaps history more. If one believes the fall of Troy, the Achaeans one may ask whether iron, are not the songs of a conquered went into exile. Obliged homeland," their cities like the Trojans, these songs, to of whom a few to live and die, "very far from the like the Greeks who fell before Troy, people, in their turn were conquered, with their rare references they saw their own image both in will never be able to tell us with Thucydides having lost after that eighty years 32 and in the con­ whose misery was like their own. They could still who had been their fathers, unglossed by pride or shame. They could look at it as the conquerors, quered, see the Trojan war over that brief span of years in its true light, conquered what neither were blinded. distant simultaneously, ever saw, for both one can see such nor conquered this is mere fancy; conqueror Of course, and as conquerors times only in fancy's light. and so perceive IN any case, this poem is a miracle. bitterness, to force, for it springs from the sub­ that is, in the last Its bitterness This subjection of the human spirit to matter. is the only justifiable jections analysis, though each spirit own virtue. earth is. No one who succumbs regarded human relations, escapes loved sorrowfully over him. constantly hangs because will bear it differently, No one in the Iliad is spared by it, as no one on in proportion to its to it is by virtue of this fact with contempt. Whoever, within of force is loved but of destruction the dominion of the threat his own soul and in that is the common lot, al­ Such is the spirit of the only true epic the Occident The Odyssey seems merely a good imitation, pos­ now of sesses. the Iliad, now of Oriental poems; which, however brilliant, is disfigured and bad taste. The chansons equity, the death of an enemy does not come home to either in the same way as does the death of Roland. or reader de geste, lacking could not attain greatness: in the Chanson de Roland, by frigidity, the sense of author bombast, the Aeneid is an imitation Attic tragedy, Sophocles, tion of justice or at any rate the tragedy is the true continuation of Aeschylus of the epic. The concep­ ever directly it, without enlightens and intervening 33 not before always itself reveals by effects and human. The accounts and justice nor enveloped spirit, suffering incarnate, and death, show that a divine trembles but is laid bare, and we see is offered for our admiration. of the Greek genius, in its coldness from whose fatality by misfortune are the last marvelous given mankind to seek above all other Father," of our Heavenly and hardness, neither those who use here the shame of the in facile pity, and bruised The in it; here force appears attended it nor those who suffer it can escape; disguised, coerced is neither spirit here more than one spirit nor held up to scorn; degraded Gospels expression as the Iliad is the first: here the Greek spirit only in the injunction goods, "the kingdom also in the fact that human suffering it in a being who is at once divine of the Passion by misfortune, in the depths of its agony, to be cut off from man and God. that accent of The sense of human misery gives the Gospels and that en­ simplicity dows Greek tragedy phrases the Trojan lad dispatched to go, who comes to mind when Christ shall gird thee and carry thee whither accent cannot be separated from Gospels, justice ing fortune spirit, himself The variety illusion of several Only he who has measured how not to respect not." This the of shift­ to what extent pressing species the dominion Certain have a ring strangely reminiscent says to Peter: "Another thou wouldst nor love as he loves from him by an abyss. cannot regard as fellow-creatures and love. He who does not realize those whom chance separated and the Iliad with all their value. to Hades, though he does not wish the idea that inspired that is the mark of the of love and justice. of constraints and necessity subjection Greek genius, of the epic, and it is it, is capable distinct every human hold in of force, and knows is changed feels itself, upon man give rise to the that cannot communicate. for the sense of human misery is a pre-condition 34 grace-this whole temptations or to ignorance. por­ is so rare as to see misfortune fairly to treat the unfortunate person is either THE relations to which each soul creates between destiny and the human soul, the ques­ of virtue to falsehood, by shame, by hatred, the exercise is fraught by pride, by the will to oblivion and through with temptations enhanced its own destiny, in the soul are transformed the soul to fit the requirements by merciless of shifting can on the other hand be preserved, the extent tion of what elements necessity as it tailors fate, and of what elements through question that are positively indifference, contempt, nothing Moreover, trayed; the tendency as though catastrophe the effects of misfortune the soul can suffer and remain unmarked fact, to be recast generally speaking, with spiritual to avoid self-deception. The rewards discovered how to achieve purity, and simplicity. the Iliad to the Gospels jumped the borders destroyed, them force that allowed they of this were great; in all their acts the greatest by way of the tragic of Greek civilization; or to ignore that is, that fail, in on the soul, to assume, in misfortune's image. The Greeks, were his natural But the spirit were endowed vocation, of this spirit once Greece was by it, can remained nothing lucidity, but pale reflections. themselves believed to Both the Romans and the Hebrews them and they retained be exempt from the misery that is the common human lot. The Romans saw their country as the nation chosen by destiny of the world; to be mistress it was Hebrews, with the their God who exalted their superior position enemies, conquered of contempt to the Romans; and the Romans had no epics, no tragedies. In Rome gladiatorial fights took the place of tragedy. With misfortune the Hebrews, was a sure indication of contempt; hence a legitimate object just as long as they obeyed Him. Strangers, slaves, of sin and to them a vanquished were objects subjects, peoples, 35 that was transmitted from poets never to ex­ and condemned is a view that makes cruelty And no text of the Old to the note heard in the parts of the book of Job. and indeed indispensable. a note comparable to God himself enemy was abhorrent piate all sorts of crimes-this permissible Testament strikes Greek epic, unless Throughout the Hebrews and word; their masterpieces quotation justify. twenty centuries have been admired, it be certain of Christianity, read, imitated, the Romans both in deed and every time anybody had a crime he wanted to have yielded an appropriate should joyfully of the Gospels Those who believe Furthermore, that God himself, have understood who seem superior a long tremor of anguish, though grace could do more for a human being and death a sign of grace in the Christian was not handed generation to the was from the the spirit down in a pure state from one Christian suffering next. To undergo very beginning considered martyrs-as than it could for Christ. once he became man, could not face the harshness without the only people who can give the impression a higher plane, to ordinary to the aids of illusion, are the people who resort fanaticism, from their own of destiny the harshness eyes. The man who does not wear the armor of the lie cannot by it to the very soul. experience him, but it can­ Grace can prevent it too well, Chris­ not spare him the wound. Having forgotten tian tradition that that simplicity can only rarely renders every sentence On the other hand, the practice threw a veil over the effects used it. in the story of the Passion. of forcible of force on the souls of those who of destiny that risen to this touch from corrupting human misery, being touched force without so poignant to conceal of having recover In spite of the brief intoxication induced Renaissance been, during the course by the discovery of Greek literature, of twenty centuries, at the time of the there has of the no revival 3 6 exaltation, proselytization century strange in Shakes­ Moliere, Something view from that of the ep•c of it was seen in Villon, and-just are exposed once-in Racine. The in L'Ecole des Femmes which took the opposite and would only acknowledge of love, while it insisted of force in war and in politics. Greek genius. peare, Cervantes, bones of human suffering and in Phedre, love being the context-a indeed, period, context effects To the list of writers given above, a few other names might be added. But nothing the peoples poem that appeared cover the epic genius, from fate, learn not to admire force, nor to scorn the unfortunate. another when they learn that there is no refuge not to hate the enemy, of Europe have produced How soon this will happen is among them. Perhaps is worth the first known in the human suffering they will yet redis­ on swathing question. with glory the 37 A Note on Simone Weil SIMONE WElL died in England in August 1 943 at the age of 34. Simone Weil was distinguished among her classmates by a products as her everyday She assimilated in which the moral and the intellectual were inex­ mental fare When she was gradu­ and Greek her culture, personality united. tricably the highest of art and science. ated and began to teach philosophy, language and literature, going always to the great primary Homeric tecture it was her personal relations . .. . But even more than her encyclopedic sense of human honesty that won the admiration mathematics to broaden sources, Vitruvius' and her delicate she continued geometry, Euclidian rules of archi­ poetry, whether knowledge, it was of her pupils. led her to communism, when she was Her temperament herself with the poor and rather with workers than In theory as well as in daily she came to know Communism, outgrowing it through She lived in Germany with the Wandervogel experience and through her own intellectual during militants. she preferred uniting about 20. Instinctively suffering, to associate with the political practice rapidly efforts. her vacations Civil War drew her to Spain, to share the trials Fascinated psychology gave up teaching of her comrades from the University, in misery and battle. by the problem of the effect on the worker's of modern technology and mechanization, she for two years in order to work in the Renault and the first shots of the to seek out the humblest tasks, 38 works and other Parisian workers. factories and to live among the life were years of torment: could cure, which no doctor suffering The ten years of her militant from headaches at the thought physical and moral suffering by the totalitarian and of the hideous regimes of total warfare. She bore it with a stoic serenity by an ardent religious to Christianity. modern problems assuming which brought Simone Weil approached with the missionary's might serve as a model. pedagogy feeling of the cruelties her ever closer inflicted foreshadowings sustained the most distressing her un­ calm courage; During the war, after she was dismissed from her university to go laws imposed for She soon sailed about organization, to get she by the Germans, in 1 942-re­ with death in her soul. She was determined in the struggle. of the racist her family to the United States post because accompanied luctantly, back again to take part the Gaullist she entered England, where which she had no illusions-with back into France by any means. But the trip in the dead of wartime winter, under undermined already health, the efforts finally, French themselves were then getting caused her death in a few weeks and consummated sacrifices. and, the she would not eat more than the meagre rations for her was disastrous way of life; her illness; by her quasi-ascetic aggravated the determination she made to be useful conditions, in France. her futile Tuberculosis (The above has been adapted with the Politics printed from the article of "The Iliad." ) edition by CANDIDE and 39
Gravity and Grace ‘One of the most profound religious thinkers of modern times.’ The Twentieth Century, 1961 ‘Time and again she pierces the veil of complacency and brings the reader face to face with the deepest levels of existence.’ Church Times ‘We must simply expose ourselves to the personality of a woman of genius, or a kind of genius akin to that of the saints.’ T. S. Eliot ‘The best spiritual writer of this century.’ André Gide ‘The light Simone shines makes everything seem, at once, reassuringly recognizable and so luminous as to be heavenly.’ Malcolm Muggeridge ‘In France she is ranked with Pascal by some, condemned as a dangerous heretic by others, and recognized as a genius by all.’ New York Times Book Review Simone Weil Gravity and Grace First complete English language edition With an introduction and postscript by Gustave Thibon Translated by Emma Crawford and Mario von der Ruhr London and New York La Pesanteur et la grâce ﬁrst published 1947 by Librairie PLON, Paris First English edition published 1952 by Routledge & Kegan Paul First published in Routledge Classics 2002 by Routledge 11 New Fetter Lane, London EC4P 4EE 29 West 35th Street, New York, NY 10001 Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2003. © 1947, 1999 Librairie PLON Translation of Chapter entitled ‘Israel’ and Postscript ©2002 Mario von der Ruhr All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers. British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data A catalog record for this book has been requested ISBN 0-203-16845-3 Master e-book ISBN ISBN 0-203-26364-2 (Adobe eReader Format) ISBN 0–415–29000–7 (hbk) ISBN 0–415–29001–5 (pbk) C ONTENTS Introduction vii Gravity and Grace Void and Compensation To Accept the Void Detachment Imagination Which Fills the Void Renunciation of Time To Desire Without an Object The Self Decreation Self-Effacement Necessity and Obedience Illusions Idolatry Love Evil Afﬂiction 1 5 10 12 16 19 22 26 32 40 43 51 60 62 69 80 vi contents Violence The Cross Balance and Lever The Impossible Contradiction The Distance Between the Necessary and the Good Chance He Whom We Must Love is Absent Atheism as a Puriﬁcation Attention and Will Training Intelligence and Grace Readings The Ring of Gyges Meaning of the Universe Metaxu Beauty Algebra The Social Imprint Israel The Great Beast Social Harmony The Mysticism of Work 85 87 92 94 98 104 107 109 114 116 123 128 134 137 140 145 148 152 155 159 164 170 178 Postscript, Fifty Years Later 182 I NTRODUCTION I ﬁnd it hard to make public the extraordinary work of Simone Weil. Hitherto I have shared with only a few special friends the joy of knowing her personality and her mind, and now I have the painful impression of divulging a family secret. My one consolation lies in the certainty that through the inevitable profanation of publicity her testimony will reach other kindred souls. I ﬁnd it still harder to be obliged, in introducing this work, to speak incidentally of myself. Secretum meum mihi: the absence of reticence among many modern writers, the taste for autobiography and confession, the habit of admitting the public to the innermost recesses of an intimacy stripped of all reserve have never failed to surprise and scandalize me. Yet I owe it to myself—were it solely to justify the appearance of my name at the head of these papers—to explain the exceptional circumstances through which I came to know the real Simone Weil and to have the undeserved honour of presenting her thoughts to the world. In June 1941 the Reverend Father Perrin, a Dominican friend viii introduction then living at Marseilles, sent me a letter which I do not happen to have kept but which ran more or less as follows: ‘There is a young Jewish girl here, a graduate in philosophy and a militant supporter of the extreme left. She is excluded from the University by the new laws and is anxious to work for a while in the country as a farm hand. I feel that such an experiment needs supervision and I should be relieved if you could put her up in your house.’ I had to think this letter over. Thank God I do not suﬀer from any a priori antisemitism, but what I know from experience of the qualities and faults of the Jewish temperament does not ﬁt in any too well with my own and is particularly illadapted to the demands of everyday life together. There is an equally wide divergence between my instinctive reactions and those of a militant supporter of the extreme left. Moreover I am a little suspicious of graduates in philosophy, and as for intellectuals who want to return to the land, I am well enough acquainted with them to know that, with a few rare exceptions, they belong to that order of cranks whose undertakings generally come to a bad end. My ﬁrst impulse was therefore to refuse. The wish to fall in with the suggestions of a friend, an unwillingness to spurn a soul which Destiny had placed in my path, the halo of sympathy surrounding the Jews as a result of the persecutions from which they were beginning to suﬀer, and, on the top of all this, a certain curiosity, made me change my mind. A few days later Simone Weil arrived at my house. At ﬁrst our relationship was friendly but uncomfortable. On the concrete plane we disagreed on practically everything. She went on arguing ad inﬁnitum in an inexorably monotonous voice and I emerged from these endless discussions literally worn out. I enveloped myself in an armour of patience and courtesy in order to bear with her. Then, thanks to the privileges of a life which is shared, I gradually discovered that the side of her character which I found so impossible, far from revealing her real deep nature, introduction showed only her exterior and social self. In her case the respective positions of being and appearing were reversed: unlike most people she gained immeasurably in an atmosphere of close intimacy; with alarming spontaneity she displayed all that was most unpleasing in her nature, but it needed much time and aﬀection, and a great deal of reserve had to be overcome, before she showed what was best in her. She was just then beginning to open with all her soul to Christianity, a limpid mysticism emanated from her; in no other human being have I come across such familiarity with religious mysteries; never have I felt the word supernatural to be more charged with reality than when in contact with her. Such mysticism had nothing in common with those religious speculations divorced from any personal commitment which are all too frequently the only testimony of intellectuals who apply themselves to the things of God. She actually experienced in its heart-breaking reality the distance between ‘knowing’ and ‘knowing with all one’s soul’, and the one object of her life was to abolish that distance. I have witnessed too much of the daily unfolding of her existence to be left with the slightest doubt as to the authenticity of her spiritual vocation: her faith and detachment were expressed in all her actions, sometimes with a disconcerting disregard for the practical but always with absolute generosity. Her asceticism might seem exaggerated in our century of half-measures where, to use the words of Léon Bloy, ‘Christians gallop with due moderation to martyrdom’ (and, indeed, how great a scandal would be caused today by the eccentric practices of certain medieval saints?); nevertheless, it was free from any emotional excess and it was impossible to discern any change of level between her mortiﬁcation and her inner life. Finding my house too comfortable, she decided to live in an old half-ruined farm belonging to my wife’s parents and situated on the banks of the Rhône. Every day she came to work and, when she deigned to eat, she had her meals with us. Though delicate ix x introduction and ill (she had suﬀered all her life from intolerable headaches, and an attack of pleurisy some years before she came to us had left its mark upon her) she worked on the land with tireless energy and often contented herself with blackberries from the wayside bushes for a meal. Every month she sent half her ration coupons to the political prisoners. As for her spiritual gifts, she distributed them with even more lavish generosity. Every evening after work she used to explain the great writings of Plato to me (I have never had time to learn Greek thoroughly). She did this with such educative genius that her teaching was as living as an original creation. Moreover she would put the same enthusiasm and love into teaching the rudiments of arithmetic to this or that backward urchin from the village. Her thirst to cultivate minds even led to some amusing misunderstandings. A kind of high-level equalitarianism led her to measure the capabilities of others by her own. There was scarcely anyone whom she did not consider able to receive the highest teaching. I remember a young working-class Lorraine girl in whom she thought she had detected signs of an intellectual vocation and to whom she poured forth at great length magniﬁcent commentaries on the Upanishads. The poor child nearly died with boredom, but shyness and good manners prevented her from saying anything. . . . In intimacy she was a charming and lively companion; she knew how to joke without bad taste and could be ironical without unkindness. Her extraordinary learning, so deeply assimilated that it could hardly be distinguished from the expression of her inner life, gave her conversation an unforgettable charm. She had a serious fault, however (or a rare quality according to the plane on which we place ourselves): it was to refuse to make any concession whatever to the requirements and conventions of social life. She always used to say everything she thought to everybody and in all circumstances. This sincerity, which was due chieﬂy to her deep respect for souls, caused her many misadventures. They were amusing for the most part, but some of introduction them nearly resulted in tragedy at a time when it was not advisable to publish every truth from the housetops. There is no question here of assessing the historical sources of her thought and the inﬂuences which may have aﬀected her. Apart from the Gospel which was her daily spiritual food, she had a deep veneration for the great Hindu and Taoistic writings, for Homer, the Greek tragedies and above all for Plato, whom she interpreted in a fundamentally Christian manner. On the other hand she hated Aristotle, whom she regarded as the ﬁrst to prepare a grave for the mystical tradition. Saint John of the Cross in the religious order, and Shakespeare, certain English mystical poets and Racine in the literary one, also left their mark on her mind. Among her contemporaries I can only think of Paul Valéry, and of Koestler in the Spanish Testament, of which she spoke to me with unmixed praise. Both her preferences and her dislikes were abrupt and ﬁnal. She ﬁrmly believed that creation of real genius required a high level of spirituality and that it was impossible to attain to perfect expression without having passed through severe inner purgation. This insistence upon inner purity and authenticity made her pitiless for all the authors in whom she thought she could detect the slightest aﬀectation, the slightest hint of insincerity or self-importance—Corneille, Hugo or Nietzsche for instance. For her the only thing that counted was a style stripped bare of all adornment, the perfect expression of the naked truth of the soul. ‘The eﬀort of expression’, she wrote to me, ‘has a bearing not only on the form but on the thought and on the whole inner being. So long as bare simplicity of expression is not attained, the thought has not touched or even come near to true greatness. . . . The real way of writing is to write as we translate. When we translate a text written in some foreign language, we do not seek to add anything to it; on the contrary, we are scrupulously careful not to add anything to it. That is how we have to try to translate a text which is not written down.’ After having passed some weeks with me, ﬁnding that she was xi xii introduction treated with too much consideration, she decided to go and work in another farm so that, a stranger among strangers, she might share the lot of real agricultural labourers. I arranged for her to be taken on in the team of grape-gatherers of a large landowner in a neighbouring village. She worked there for more than a month with heroic regularity, always refusing, in spite of the fact that she was delicate and unaccustomed to the task, to spend shorter hours at it than the sturdy peasants who surrounded her. Her headaches were so bad that at times she had the impression of living through a nightmare. ‘One day’, she owned to me, ‘I wondered if I had not died and fallen into hell without noticing, and whether hell did not consist of working eternally in a vineyard. . . .’ After this experience she went back to Marseilles, where her parents, who had been driven from Paris by the invasion, were living provisionally. I went sometimes to see her there in her little ﬂat with its view stretching endlessly across the magniﬁcent spaces of the sea. Meantime her parents were preparing to leave for the United States. Her devotion to her country in misfortune and her eagerness to share the fate of her persecuted friends made her hesitate for a long time about going with them. She eventually decided to do so in the hopes of being able to pass from there into Russia or England. I saw her for the last time at the beginning of 1942. At the station she gave me a portfolio crammed with papers, asking me to read them and to take care of them during her exile. As I parted from her I said jokingly, in an attempt to hide my feelings: ‘Goodbye till we meet again in this world or the next!’ She suddenly became serious and replied: ‘In the next there will be no meeting again.’ She meant that the limits which form our ‘empirical self’ will be done away with in the unity of eternal life. I watched her for a moment as she was disappearing down the street. We were not to meet again: contacts with the eternal in the time order are fearfully ephemeral. introduction On reaching home I went through Simone Weil’s manuscripts. There were a dozen thick exercise books in which day by day she recorded her thoughts. They ware interspersed with quotations in all languages and with strictly personal notes. Until then I had not read anything by her except a few poems and the studies on Homer which appeared in the Cahiers du Sud under the anagrammatical name of Emile Novis. All the writings which are to be read farther on are drawn from these notebooks. I had time to write once more to Simone Weil to let her know how deeply I had been moved by what I read. From Oran she sent me the following letter which, in spite of its personal character, I have ventured to quote in full since it explains and justiﬁes the publication of this book: ‘Dear Friend, It seems as though the time has now really come for us to say goodbye to each other. It will not be easy for me to hear from you frequently. I hope that Destiny will spare the house at Saint Marcel—the house inhabited by three beings who love each other. That is someting very precious. Human existence is so fragile a thing and exposed to such dangers that I cannot love without trembling. I have never yet been able to resign myself to the fact that all human beings except myself are not completely preserved from every possibility of harm. That shows a serious falling short in the duty of submission to God’s will. ‘You tell me that in my notebooks you have found, besides things which you yourself had thought, others you had not thought but for which you were waiting; so now they belong to you, and I hope that after having been transmuted within you they will one day come out in one of your works. For it is certainly far better for an idea to be associated with your fortunes than with mine. I have a feeling that my own fortunes will never be good in this world (it is not that I count on their being better elsewhere; I cannot think that will be so). I am not a xiii xiv introduction person with whom it is advisable to link one’s fate. Human beings have always more or less sensed this; but, I do not know for what mysterious reason, ideas seem to have less discernment. I wish nothing better for those which have come in my direction than that they should have a good establishment, and I should be very happy for them to ﬁnd a lodging beneath your pen, whilst changing their form so as to reﬂect your likeness. That would somewhat diminish my sense of responsibility and the crushing weight of the thought that through my many defects I am incapable of serving the truth as I see it when in an inconceivable excess of mercy it seems to me that it deigns to allow me to behold it. I believe that you will take all that as simply as I say it to you. In the operation of writing, the hand which holds the pen, and the body and soul which are attached to it, with all their social environment, are things of inﬁnitesimal importance for those who love the truth. They are inﬁnitely small in the order of nothingness. That at any rate is the measure of importance I attach in this operation not only to my own personality but to yours and to that of any other writer I respect. Only the personality of those whom I more or less despise matters to me in such a domain. . . . ‘I do not know whether I have already said it to you, but as to my notebooks, you can read whatever passages you like from them to whomever you like, but you must leave none of them in the hands of anyone else. . . . If you hear nothing of me for three or four years, you can consider that you have complete ownership of them. ‘I am saying all this to you so that I can go away with a freer mind. I only regret not being able to conﬁde to you all that I still bear undeveloped within me. Luckily, however, what is within me is either valueless or else it exists outside me in a perfect form, in a place of purity where no harm can come to it and whence it will always be able to come down again. That being so, nothing concerning me can have any kind of importance. introduction ‘I also like to think that after the slight shock of separation you will not feel any sorrow about whatever may be in store for me, and that if you should sometimes happen to think of me you will do so as one thinks of a book one read in childhood. I do not want ever to occupy a diﬀerent place from that in the hearts of those I love, because then I can be sure of never causing them any unhappiness. ‘I shall never forget the generosity which made you say and write to me some of those things which warm and cheer us even when, as in my case, it is impossible to believe them. They are a support all the same—perhaps too much so. I do not know whether we shall be able to go on corresponding much longer. We must however think of that as unimportant. . . .’ If I had been a saint I should have been able to accept the oﬀer which this letter contained. I should also have been able to accept it if I had been an utterly despicable individual. In the ﬁrst case my self would not have counted at all, and in the second it would have been the only thing that did count. As I am neither the one nor the other the question did not arise. Simone Weil wrote to me again from Casablanca, then a last time from New York. After that the occupation of the free zone by the Germans held up our correspondence. In November 1944, when I was expecting her return to France, I heard from friends we had in common that she had died a year before in London. Simone Weil was too pure to have many secrets; she spoke of herself as simply as of everything else. It would be quite easy for me by referring to my memories and to our conversations together to give a very good portrait of her from the superﬁcial point of view, a portrait of which the originality would delight all those who love anecdotes and details from actual experience. The aﬀection I bore her makes that impossible. A brother cannot xv xvi introduction speak about his sister as one writer of another. Moreover, to season such highly spiritual fare with pictorial condiments would result in somewhat bad taste. I will therefore conﬁne myself to outlining the main features of her life before and after our meeting. She was born in Paris in 1909 and after having been one of Alain’s pupils entered the Ecole Normale Supérieure very young, there to do brilliantly in her agrégation,1 her subject being philosophy. After that she taught in a number of secondary schools and very soon began to take part in politics. It goes without saying that the revolutionary convictions, which she aired with complete disregard for professional or social conventions, brought her into diﬃculties with the authorities. She rose above such diﬃculties with calm disdain. To an inspector who threatened her with reports which might have led to her dismissal she smilingly replied ‘I have always considered dismissal as the normal crowning of my career.’ She fought in the ranks of the extreme left, but she never joined any political body, contenting herself with defending the weak and oppressed irrespective of party or race. Wishing to share to the uttermost the lot of the poor, she asked for a holiday and took a job in the Renault works, where, without letting anyone know who she was, she worked for a year on the benches. She hired a room in the workmen’s district and lived entirely on her meagre earnings. An attack of pleurisy put an end to this experiment. At the time of the Spanish War she entered the ranks of the Reds, but she made a point of never using her weapons and was more an animator than a ﬁghter. A physical accident (she inadvertently scalded her feet) necessitated her being brought back to France. In these tragic circumstances, as throughout her life, her parents, to whom she was deeply attached but whom she kept in an agony 1 Competitive examination conducted by the State for admission to posts on the teaching staﬀ of lycées. introduction of anxiety by her heroic extravagances, surrounded her with constant care, which certainly put oﬀ the inevitable outcome of an existence so free from anything tending to keep it captive in the ﬂesh. ‘The strength which the Karamazovs draw from the lowest part of their nature’ and which keeps man glued to this earth was strangely lacking in her. . . . Before recalling Simone Weil’s attitude during the developments which caused the French to be so deeply divided during the years 1940 to 1944, I want to stress the fact that it would be harmful to her memory were the eternal and transcendent part of her message to be interpreted in the light of present-day politics and confused with party quarrels. No faction, no social ideology has the right to claim her. Her love of the people and her hatred of all oppression are not enough to place her among the leftists any more than her denial of progress and her cult for tradition authorize us to class her on the right. She put the same passionate enthusiasm into her political activities as into everything else, but far from making an idol of an idea, a nation or a class, she knew that the social ﬁeld is above all the abode of what is relative and evil (‘to contemplate the social scene’, she wrote, ‘is as eﬀective a puriﬁcation as to withdraw from the world, and that is why I have not been wrong in mixing for so long a time in politics’). She knew that in these matters the duty of a supernatural soul does not consist in fanatically embracing a party but in ceaselessly trying to restore the balance by taking the side of the defeated and the oppressed. It was thus that, in spite of her dislike for Communism, she wanted to go to Russia when that country was bleeding under the heel of the Germans. This idea of counterbalancing is essential in her conception of political and social activity: ‘If we know in what direction the scales of society are tilted we must do what we can to add weight to the lighter side. Although the weight may be something evil, if we handle it with this motive we shall perhaps not be tainted by it. But we must have a conception of equal balance and be always ready to xvii xviii introduction change sides like Justice—that fugitive from the camp of conquerors.’ At the time of the Armistice this state of mind inclined her towards the movement of divers origins and ends which is now referred to under the global term of Resistance. Before she left for America she had had a bone to pick with the police of the French State and there is no doubt as to what would have been her fate if she had still been in France at the time of the great Gestapo raids. As soon as she reached the United States she took steps to become enrolled in the forces of the Resistance. She left for London in 1942 and worked there for some time under M. Maurice Schumann. She begged persistently to be sent on a mission to France, but her racial type was too recognizable to allow of this. Being unable to expose herself to the dangers which then hung over the lives of the French, she wanted at least to share their privations and strictly kept to rations which never exceeded the amount allocated by food coupons in France. This diet soon got the better of her health which, even to start with, was variable. Worn out with hunger and phthisis, she had to go into hospital. There she suﬀered acutely on account of any special comforts which were ordered for her. I had already noticed this characteristic when she was at my home: she had a horror of being given privileges and ﬁercely shook herself free from any watchful care which aimed at raising her above the common level. She only felt at ease on the lowest rung of the social ladder, lost among the masses of poor folk and outcasts of this world. She was moved to the country and died there after having shown her joy at once more seeing Nature. I have no details of her end. ‘The death agony’, she once said, ‘is the supreme dark night which is necessary even for the perfect if they are to attain to absolute purity, and for that reason it is better that it should be bitter.’ I dare to think that her life had been hard enough for her to have been granted a peaceful passage. introduction Simone Weil’s writings belong to the category of very great work which can only be weakened and spoilt by a commentary. My sole reason for introducing these texts is that my friendship with the author and the long conversations we had together clear away my diﬃculties in entering into her thought and make it easier for me to replace in their exact setting and their organic context certain formulae which are too bald or need to be elaborated. We must, in fact, remember that we are here concerned, as in Pascal’s case, with simple waiting stones set out day by day, often hurriedly, with a view to a more complete building which, alas! never came into being. The texts are bare and simple1 like the inner experience which they express. No padding is interposed between the life and the word; soul, thought and expression form one block with no joins in it. Even if I had not known Simone Weil personally, her style alone would in my opinion guarantee the authenticity of her testimony. What is most striking in these thoughts is the comprehensiveness of their possible applications; their simplicity simpliﬁes everything they touch; they transport us to those summits of being from which the eye embraces in one glance an inﬁnity of horizons one above the other. ‘We must welcome all opinions,’ she used to say, ‘but they must be arranged vertically and kept on suitable levels.’ Again: ‘Whatever is real enough to allow of superposed interpretations is innocent and good.’ This sign of greatness and purity is found on every page of her work. Here for instance is a thought which wipes out the ancient quarrel between optimism and pessimism—that quarrel which Leibniz could not settle: ‘There is every degree of distance between the creature and God. A distance in which the love of God is impossible: matter, plants, animals. Evil is so complete 1 This is the explanation of certain repetitions and negligences of style which we have scrupulously respected throughout. xix xx introduction there that it destroys itself: there is no longer any evil: mirror of divine innocence. We are at the point where love is just possible. It is a great privilege since the love which unites is in proportion to the distance. God has created a world which is not the best possible but which contains the whole range of good and evil. We are at the point where it is as bad as possible because beyond is the stage where evil becomes innocence.’ Or there is this other thought which throws light on the problem of evil and reaches to the very secrets of divine love: ‘All created things refuse to satisfy me as ends. Such is the extreme mercy of God towards me. And that very thing constitutes evil. Evil is the form which the mercy of God takes in this world.’ And then there is this abrupt and ﬁnal refutation of all such philosophers as Schopenhauer or Sartre who argue that the presence of evil in the world justiﬁes a fundamental pessimism: ‘To say that the world is not worth anything, that this life is of no value, and to give evil as the proof is absurd, for if these things are worthless what does evil take from us?’ Or again, we ﬁnd the law of the insertion of the higher into the lower formulated thus: ‘Every order which transcends another can only be introduced into it under the form of something inﬁnitely small.’ This completes and deepens the law of the three orders of Pascal. The world of life does indeed appear to be inﬁnitely small in the midst of the material world: what do living beings represent when compared to the huge mass of the planet and perhaps of the cosmos? It is the same with the spiritual world in relation to the world of life: there are at least 500,000 living species on the earth, of which only one possesses ‘il ben dell’ intelletto’. And as for the world of grace, it, in turn, appears inﬁnitely small against the mass of our secular thoughts and aﬀections: the gospel illustrations of the leaven and the grain of mustard seed are clear enough evidence of this ‘characteristic of being inﬁnitesimal which belongs to pure goodness’. Impregnating the whole of Simone Weil’s work is the driving introduction force of an intense desire for inward puriﬁcation which comes out even in her metaphysics and her theology. Stretching out with all her soul towards a pure and absolute goodness of which nothing here below provides her with a proof but which she feels to be more real than anything existing in and around her, she seeks to establish her faith in this perfect being upon a base which no stroke of fortune, no aﬄiction, no surging wave either of mind or matter can shake. For that, it is important before all things to eliminate from the inner life all forms of illusion and compensation (imaginative piety, the ‘consolations’ of religion, a crude faith in the immortality of the self, etc.) which too often usurp the name of God and which are really no more than shelters for our weakness or our pride: ‘We have to be careful about the level on which we place the inﬁnite. If we put it on the level which is only suitable for the ﬁnite it does not much matter what name we give it.’ Creation reﬂects God by its beauty and harmony, but, through the evil and death which abide in it and the blind necessity by which it is governed, it also reﬂects the absence of God. We have issued from God: that means that we bear his imprint and it means also that we are separated from him. The etymology of the word to exist (to be placed outside) is very illuminating in this respect: we can say we exist, we cannot say we are. God who is Being has in a sense eﬀaced himself so that we can exist: he has given up being everything in order that we might exist; he has dispossessed himself in our favour of his own necessity, which is identical with goodness, to allow another necessity to reign which is alien and indiﬀerent to good. The central law of this world, from which God has withdrawn by his very act of creation, is the law of gravity, which is to be found analogously in every stage of existence. Gravity is the force which above all others draws us from God. It impels each creature to seek everything which can preserve or enlarge it and, as Thucydides says, to exercise all the power of which it is capable. Psychologically it xxi xxii introduction is shown by all those motives which are directed towards asserting or reinstating the self, by all those secret subterfuges (lies of the inner life, escape in dreams or false ideals, imaginary encroachments on the past and the future, etc.) which we make use of to bolster up from inside our tottering existence, that is to say, to remain apart from and opposed to God. Simone Weil presents the problem of evil as follows: ‘How can we escape from that which corresponds to gravity in ourselves?’ By grace alone. In order to come to us God passes through the inﬁnite thickness of time and space; his grace changes nothing in the play of those blind forces of necessity and chance which guide the world; it penetrates into our souls as a drop of water makes its way through geological strata without aﬀecting their structure, and there it waits in silence until we consent to become God again. Whereas gravity is the work of creation, the work of grace consists of ‘decreating’ us. God consented through love to cease to be everything so that we might be something; we must consent through love to cease to be anything so that God may become everything again. It is therefore a question of abolishing the self within us, ‘that shadow thrown by sin and error which stops the light of God and which we take for a being.’ Without this utter humility, this unconditional consent to be nothing, all forms of heroism and immolation are still subject to the law of gravity and falsehood: ‘We can oﬀer nothing short of ourselves. Otherwise what we term our oﬀering is merely a label attached to a compensatory assertion of the “I” ’. In order to kill the self we must be ready to endure all the wounds of life, exposing ourselves naked and defenceless to its fangs, we must accept emptiness, an unequal balance, we must never seek compensations and, above all, we must suspend the work of our imagination, ‘which perpetually tends to stop up the cracks through which grace ﬂows.’ Every sin is an attempt to ﬂy from emptiness. We must also renounce the past and future, introduction xxiii for the self is nothing but a coagulation of past and future around a present which is always falling away. Memory and hope destroy the wholesome eﬀect of aﬄiction by providing an unlimited ﬁeld where we can be lifted up in imagination (‘I used to be’, ‘I shall be’ . . .), but faithfulness to the passing moment reduces man truly to nothing and thus opens to him the gates of eternity. The self should be destroyed in us from within by love. But its destruction can also be brought about from without by extreme suﬀering and degradation. There are vagrants and prostitutes who have no more self-esteem than the saints and whose life is conﬁned to the passing moment. Therein lies the tragedy of degradation. It is irreparable, not because the self which it destroys is precious, for the self is made to be destroyed, but because it prevents God from eﬀecting the destruction himself and robs eternalizing love of its prey. Simone Weil makes a sharp distinction between this supernatural immolation and all forms of human grandeur and heroism. Here below God is the feeblest and most destitute of beings; his love, unlike that of idols, does not ﬁll the carnal part of the soul; to go to him we have to labour in the void, to refuse every intoxication of passion or pride which veils the horrible mystery of death, and to allow ourselves to be guided only by the ‘still, small voice’ spoken of in the Bible—a voice inaudible to the senses and unnoticed by the self. ‘To say to Christ as Saint Peter did: “I will always be faithful to thee”, is to deny him already, for it is to suppose that the source of ﬁdelity is in ourselves and not in grace. As he was chosen, this denial was made known to all men and to himself. How many others boast in the same way— and never understand.’ It is easy to die for something forceful because participation in force produces an intoxication which stupeﬁes us. But it is supernatural to die for something weak: thousands of men were able to die heroically for Napoleon, whilst Christ in his agony was deserted by his disciples (the xxiv introduction sacriﬁce was easier later on for the martyrs, for they were already upheld by the social force of the Church). ‘Supernatural love has no contact with force, moreover it does not protect the soul against the coldness of force, the coldness of steel. Only an earthly attachment, if it has in it enough energy, can aﬀord protection against the coldness of steel. Armour is made of metal in the same way as the sword. If we want a love which will protect the soul from wounds we must love something other than God.’ The hero wears armour, the saint is naked. Now armour, while keeping oﬀ blows, prevents any direct contact with reality and above all makes it impossible to enter the third dimension which is that of supernatural love. If things are really to exist for us they have to penetrate within us. Hence the necessity for being naked: nothing can enter into us while armour protects us both from wounds and from the depths which they open up. All sin is an attack against the third dimension, an attempt to bring back to the plane of unreality and painlessness an emotion which seeks to penetrate to the depths. This law is inexorable: we lessen our own suﬀering to the extent that we weaken our inner and direct communion with reality. At the extreme limit of this process life is entirely stretched out on the surface: we suﬀer no more except in a dream, for existence, reduced to two dimensions, becomes ﬂat like a dream. This holds good for consolations, illusions, boasting and all the compensatory reactions by which we try to ﬁll up the hollows bitten into us by reality. Every empty place or hollow does in fact imply the presence of the third dimension; it is not possible to enter into a surface, and to ﬁll up a hole is equivalent to taking refuge in isolation on the surface. The adage of ancient physics: ‘Nature abhors a vacuum’, is strictly true in psychology. But this vacuum is precisely what grace needs in order to come into us. This process of ‘decreation’, which is the only way of salvation, is the work of grace and not of the will. Man does not pull introduction himself up to heaven by the hair. The will is only useful for servile tasks; it controls the right use of natural virtues, which are pre-requisites of the work of grace, in the same way as the ploughman’s eﬀort must precede the sowing. But the divine seed comes from elsewhere. . . . In this realm Simone Weil, like Plato and Malebranche, considers attention to be of far more importance than will: ‘We must be indiﬀerent to good and evil, really indiﬀerent; that is to say, we must turn the light of attention equally on each of them. Then the good will triumph by an automatic phenomenon.’ It is precisely this superior automatism which has to be created; it is not obtained by tightening up the self and ‘going beyond one’s capacity’ (forçant son talent) for doing good (nothing is more degrading than a noble action performed in an unworthy spirit) but by arriving through self-eﬀacement and love at that state of perfect docility to grace whence goodness spontaneously emanates. ‘Action is the pointer which shows the balance. We must not touch the pointer but the weight.’ Unfortunately it is easier to tamper with the pointer than to alter our own weight in these ‘golden scales of Zeus’. So, then, religious attention raises us above the ‘aberration of opposites’ and the choice between good and evil—‘Choice, a notion belonging to a low level’. So long as I hesitate between doing or not doing a bad action (for instance, possessing or not such and such a woman who oﬀers herself to me, betraying or not betraying some friend), even if I choose the good I scarcely rise above the evil I reject. In order for my ‘good’ action to be really pure, I must dominate this miserable oscillation so that the righteousness of my outward behaviour is the exact expression of my inward necessity. Holiness is like degradation in this respect1; just as an utterly despicable man does not hesitate to 1 This is the postulate of Hermes: the highest resembles the lowest—a central law of being of which Simone Weil gives endless illustrations in her work. Thus the non-resistance of the saints is outwardly indistinguishable from cowardice; supreme wisdom ends in a sense of ignorance, the motions of grace have the xxv xxvi introduction possess himself of a woman if his passion demands it or to betray a friend if it is in his interest to do so, a saint has no choice to make about remaining pure and faithful: he cannot do anything else; he goes towards goodness like the bee towards a ﬂower. Goodness which we choose by balancing it against evil has scarcely anything but social value; to the eyes of Him ‘who seeth in secret’ it proceeds from the same motives and is marked by the same vulgarity as evil. Hence the kinship often observed between certain forms of ‘virtue’ and the corresponding sin: theft and the bourgeois respect for property, adultery and a ‘respectable woman’, the savings-bank and waste, etc. Real goodness is not opposed to evil (in order to oppose something directly it is necessary to be on the same level); it transcends and eﬀaces it. ‘What evil violates is not goodness, for goodness is inviolate; only a degraded good can be violated.’ The soul engaged in the pursuit of pure goodness comes up against irreducible contradictions. Contradiction is the criterion of reality. ‘Our life is impossibility, absurdity. Everything that we want is in contradiction with the conditions or consequences which are attached to it. It is because we ourselves are a contradiction, being creatures, being God and inﬁnitely other than God.’ Have countless children, for instance, and you are bringing about overpopulation and war (Japan is a typical case of this); improve the material conditions of a nation and you are in danger of impairing its soul; devote yourself entirely to someone and you will cease to exist for him, etc. Only imaginary good things have no contradiction in them: the girl who wants to have numerous oﬀspring, the social reformer who dreams of the people’s well-being, etc., meet with no obstacles so long as they do not pass on to action; they sail gaily forward in a sea of pure but ﬁctitious goodness; the shock of hitting the rocks is the inevitability of animal instincts. (‘I have become as a beast of burden before thy face’ . . .), detachment is like indiﬀerence, etc. introduction signal which wakens them. We must accept this contradiction— the sign of our misery and our greatness—in all its bitterness. It is through fully experiencing and suﬀering from the absurdity as such of this universe where good and evil are mixed that we attain to the pure goodness whose kingdom is not of this world. ‘That action is pure which we can accomplish by keeping our intention totally directed towards pure and impossible goodness, without disguising from ourselves by any lie either the attraction or the impossibility of pure goodness.’ Instead of ﬁlling the space which stretches between necessity and goodness with dreams (faith in God as a temporal father, science, progress . . .) we must receive the two branches of contradiction just as they are and allow ourselves to be torn asunder by their distance. And it is in this tearing, which is as it were a reﬂection in man of the creative act which rends God, that we rediscover the original identity of necessity and goodness: ‘This world, in so far as it is quite empty of God, is God himself. Necessity, in so far as it is absolutely distinct from goodness, is goodness itself. That is why all consolation in aﬄiction separates us from love and from truth. Therein lies the mystery of mysteries. When we touch it we are secure.’ He, therefore, who refuses to accept confusion is marked for suﬀering. From Antigone whom the guardian of the temporal city called upon to go and love among the shades, down to Simone Weil herself whom human injustice cruciﬁed until she was in her grave, aﬄiction is the lot of all those lovers of the absolute who are astray in this world of relative things: ‘If we want only goodness we are opposed to the law which links good to evil as the illuminated object to the shadow, and, being opposed to the universal law of the world, it is inevitable that we should fall into aﬄiction.’ In so far as the soul is not completely emptied of itself, this thirst for pure goodness leads to the suﬀering of expiation; in a perfectly innocent soul it produces redemptive suﬀering: ‘To be innocent is to bear the weight of the whole universe. It is to throw in the xxvii xxviii introduction counterweight to restore the balance.’ Thus purity does not abolish suﬀering; on the contrary it deepens it to inﬁnity whilst giving it an eternal meaning: ‘The extreme greatness of Christianity lies in the fact that it does not seek a supernatural cure for suﬀering, but a supernatural use of it.’ This mystery of suﬀering which ‘decreates’ man and gives him back to God ﬁnds its centre in the mystery of the Incarnation. If God had not been incarnate, man who suﬀers and dies would have become in a sense greater than God. But God made himself man and died on the Cross. ‘God abandoned God. God emptied himself: these words enfold the meaning both of the Creation and of the Incarnation with the Passion. . . . To teach us that we are nothing (non-être) God made himself nothing.’ In other words God became a creature in order to teach us how to undo the creature in ourselves, and the act of love by which he was separated from himself brings us back to him. Simone Weil sees the essence of the mediatorial function of Jesus Christ in his assumption of the human condition with all that is most miserable and tragic in it: the signs and miracles constitute the human and relatively low part of his mission; the supernatural part consists of the agony, the sweat of blood, the Cross and his vain calls to an unanswering heaven. The words of the Redeemer: ‘My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?’ which sum up all the agony of the creature thrown into the midst of time and evil and to which the Father replies only with silence—these words alone are enough proof for her of the divinity of Christianity. Man only ﬁnds salvation by living in the bare instant, renouncing the past and future. That rules out the modern myth of the indeﬁnite progress of humanity, even when it is presented under the form of a divine education. There are few ideas which are as impious as this one, for it tends to make us seek in the future what eternity alone can give, that is to say, to turn away from God. ‘Nothing can have a destination which is not its origin. The contrary idea, the idea of progress—poison. The plant introduction xxix which bears such fruit should be torn up by the roots.’ This does not mean to say that humanity cannot acquire anything in the course of time, but such progress, in so far as it is temporal, can never be indeﬁnite, for duration always ends by devouring what it has brought to birth. Time, accepted as irremediably diﬀerent from eternity, is for us the door opening onto the eternal: we must not make of it a substitute for eternity. From this essential condition of salvation, the necessity of living in the pure instantaneous present and of toiling regardless of results, Simone Weil draws a magniﬁcent spirituality of manual work. Such work puts man into direct contact with the inherent absurdity and contradiction of earthly life and thus, if the worker does not lie, it enables him to touch heaven. ‘Work makes us experience in an exhausting manner the phenomenon of ﬁnality rebounding like a ball; to work in order to eat, to eat in order to work. . . . If we regard one of the two as an end, or the one and the other taken separately, we are lost. Only the cycle contains the truth.’ But in order to compass this cycle we must turn from the future and rise up to the eternal. ‘It is not religion but revolution which is the opium of the people.’ Here below, a thousand relative objects bearing the label of absolute come between the soul and God. So long as man does not consent to become nothing in order to be everything he needs idols. ‘Idolatry is a vital necessity in the cave.’ And among these idols the social one of the collective soul is the most powerful and dangerous. Most sins can be traced back to the social element. They spring from a thirst to appear and to dominate. It is not that Simone Weil rejects the social element as such; she knows that our environment, roots and traditions form bridges, metaxu between earth and heaven; what she repudiates is the totalitarian city—symbolized by the ‘Great Beast’ of Plato and the Beast of the Apocalypse—whose power and prestige usurp God’s place in the soul. Whether it shows itself under a conservative or a revolutionary aspect, whether it consists of xxx introduction adoring the present or the future city, social idolatry always tends to stiﬂe and to replace the true mystic tradition. All the persecutions of prophets and saints are due to it; through it Antigone and Joan of Arc were condemned and Jesus Christ cruciﬁed. The social Beast oﬀers man a substitute for religion which allows him to transcend his individuality without surrendering his self and so, at small cost, to dispense with God; a social imitation of the highest virtues is possible by which they are immediately degraded into pharisaism: ‘The pharisee is he who is virtuous out of obedience to the Great Beast.’ Two nations of antiquity illustrate this idolatry of the collective soul: Israel and Rome. ‘Rome is the Great Beast of atheism and materialism, adoring nothing but itself. Israel is the Great Beast of religion. Neither the one nor the other is likable. The Great Beast is always repulsive.’ The conﬂict between Israel and Rome, in which Nietzsche saw the duel of two irreconcilable conceptions of life, was reduced for Simone Weil to a struggle between two totalitarianisms of the same nature. It must however be emphasized that her antisemitism, which was so violent that the continuity established by the Church between the Old and New Testaments was one of the chief obstacles to her becoming a Catholic, was of a purely spiritual order and consequently had nothing in common with what goes by that name today. She had, for example, the same aversion for Hitlerian antisemitism as for the Jewish idea of a temporal Messianic rule. How many times did she not speak to me of the Jewish roots of antisemitism! She was fond of saying that Hitler hunted on the same ground as the Jews and only persecuted them in order to resuscitate under another name and to his own advantage their tribal god, terrestrial, cruel and exclusive. Her horror of the social idol was of course extended to all other forms of totalitarian mysticism and in particular to Marxism. Even the Catholic Church, which moreover she admired in many of its aspects, did not escape her criticism as a social body. Its Jewish and Roman introduction xxxi sources, its connexion with temporal things, its organization and hierarchy, its councils, certain formulae such as ‘no salvation outside the Church’ or anathema sit and some of its historical records such as the Inquisition, etc., appeared to her to be forms (of a higher order, but nevertheless inﬁnitely to be feared) of social idolatry. Yet she never ceased to believe in the divine presence and inspiration within the Church. ‘Happily, the gates of hell will not prevail’, she wrote towards the end of her life; ‘there remains an incorruptible core of truth.’ Such are the main lines of Simone Weil’s thought. The schematic nature of this exposition necessarily leaves on one side a thousand touches which give precision, strength and balance to her doctrine. But an introduction, as its name suggests, can be no more than an invitation to cross the threshold. I may say that my friendship and veneration for Simone Weil, the pain of losing her and the joy of ﬁnding her again each day above and beyond death, the fact that I constantly feed upon her thought and, above all, the insuperable reserve with which all true intimacy is accompanied, combine to make the eﬀort of detachment required of me in undertaking an objective and critical analysis of her work almost impossible. I am a Catholic, Simone Weil was not. I have never doubted for a second that she was inﬁnitely more advanced than I am in the experimental knowledge of supernatural truths, but outwardly she always remained on the borders of the Church and was never baptized. One of the last letters she wrote me shows very clearly her attitude with regard to Catholicism: ‘At this moment I should be more ready to die for the Church, if one day before long it should need anyone to die for it, than I should be to enter it. To die does not commit one to anything, if one to say such a thing; it does not contain anything in the nature of a lie. . . . At present I have the impression that I am lying whatever I do, whether it be by remaining outside the Church or by xxxii introduction entering it. The question is to know where there is less of a lie. . . .’ As to whether Simone Weil were a heroic lover of Jesus Christ, my conviction has never changed; all the same her doctrine, though it is within the orbit of the great Christian truths, contains nothing speciﬁcally Catholic and she never accepted the universal authority of the Church. Now a Catholic who has to assess the thought of a non-Catholic has diﬃculty in avoiding two opposite extremes. The ﬁrst consists of applying the principles of speculative theology to the thought in question and mercilessly condemning everything which, seen from outside, does not appear to be strictly orthodox. This method has the advantage of railings, which are always necessary on the bridges leading to God, but, used without understanding or love, it is in danger of degenerating into an abuse of the evangelical precept: ‘if thine eye oﬀend thee . . .’. For my part, as I am neither a theologian nor specially entrusted with the defence of the deposit of Christian faith, I do not feel myself in any way qualiﬁed for such an undertaking. The last thing I want to do is to set myself up as an oﬃcial theologian who, armed with a sort of Baedeker of divine things, presumes to pronounce ﬁnal judgment on the report, even incomplete, of a heroic explorer. . . . The second danger consists of trying at whatever cost to bend the thought one is studying into conformity with Catholic truth. That is a manifest abuse of the text ‘compel them to come in’. We think that whatever is true or pure in a human life or work ﬁnds its place naturally in the Catholic synthesis without being forced or twisted in order to do so. We have no need to grasp everything for ourselves like a miser trying to increase his treasure, for everything already belongs to us who belong to Christ. It is not for me to decide how far the ideas of Simone Weil are or are not orthodox. I will conﬁne myself to showing—on purely personal evidence—how far a Christian can interpret these ideas in order to ﬁnd nourishment for his spiritual life. I shall be particularly careful not to pick a quarrel with introduction xxxiii Simone Weil about words. Her vocabulary is that of the mystics and not of the speculative theologians: it does not seek to express the eternal order of being but the actual journey of the soul in search of God. This is the case with all spiritual writers. When in the Dialogue of Saint Catherine of Siena Christ says to her; ‘I am that which is, thou art that which is not’, this formula which reduces the creature to pure nothingness cannot be accepted on the plane of ontological knowledge. It is the same with the expressions used by so many mystics who speak of the poverty of God, of his dependence in relation to the creature, etc.: they are true in the order of love and false in the order of being. Jacques Maritain was the ﬁrst to show, with perfect metaphysical precision, that these two vocabularies do not contradict each other, for one is related to speculative and the other to practical and aﬀective knowledge. Two things in particular in Simone Weil’s work have shocked the few friends to whom I have shown her manuscripts. First the absolute division which she seems to establish between the created world and a transcendent God who has tied his own hands in the presence of evil and who abandons the universe to the sport of chance and absurdity: there is a danger lest this clean cut should lead to the elimination of the idea of Providence in history and of the notion of progress, and as a result to a misunderstanding of the values and duties of this present world. In the second place her fear of the social element is likely to lead to the isolation of the individual in a proud self-suﬃciency. I repeat that Simone Weil speaks as a mystic and not as a metaphysician. I am prepared to admit, and I do so readily, that the tendency of her genius which inclines her constantly to stress the irreducible nature of supernatural reality often leads her to overlook the meeting places and transitional stages between nature and grace. Nothing is more certain than that she has misunderstood certain aspects of Christian piety. But that does not authorize us to assert that the aspect she describes is not xxxiv introduction Christian. No human experience—if we except that of Christ— has ever embraced supernatural truth in its totality. Saint John of the Cross, for instance, does not emphasize the same divine realities as Saint Bonaventura. There are several schools of spirituality, and, if we substitute the word ‘God’ for ‘world’, we can say of the mystics what the poet said of men in general: ‘Dass jeder sieht die Welt in seinem Sinn Und jeder siehet recht, so viel ist Sinn darin!’ If, as the Gospel says, there are many mansions in heaven, there are also many roads which lead to heaven. Simone Weil chose the negative road: ‘There are people for whom everything is salutary here below which brings God nearer; for me it is everything which keeps him at a distance.’ Is not this royal road of salvation which consists of ﬁnding and loving God in what is absolutely other than God (the blind necessity of nothingness and evil . . .) strangely like the bare mountain of Carmel where man has as his guide just one single word: nothing? And does Saint John of the Cross speak in less absolute terms of the nothingness of created things and of the love which binds us to them?—‘The entire being of the creatures compared with the inﬁnite being of God is nothing, and thus the soul which is a prisoner of what is created is nothing. All the beauty of creatures is supreme ugliness before the inﬁnite beauty of God. All the grace, all the charm of creatures is insipid and repulsive before the divine beauty. All the goodness the creatures contain is only the height of malice when it is in the presence of divine goodness. Only God is good. . . .’ Moreover, though the ‘theology’ of Simone Weil rejects the idea of popular imagination of a God who governs the world like the father of a family or a temporal sovereign, it does not in any way exclude the action of Providence in the higher sense of the word. There is no doubt that here below matter and evil introduction exercise ‘all the causality which belongs to them’; the spectacle of the innumerable horrors of history is enough to prove that the kingdom of God is not of this world (does not Scripture describe the devil as the prince of this world?). Nevertheless God remains mysteriously present in creation: without in any way changing the calamities which weigh upon us, his grace plays upon the laws of gravity like the sun’s rays in the clouds. This God ‘who is silent in his love’ is not indiﬀerent to human misery after the manner of the God of Aristotle or Spinoza. It is out of love for his creature that he appears to eﬀace himself from creation; it is in order to lead him on to the supreme purity that he leaves him to cross the whole expanse of suﬀering and darkness abandoned and alone. In tying his own hands in the presence of evil, in stripping himself of everything which resembles earthly power and prestige, God invites men to love nothing but love in him. ‘He gives himself to men either as powerful or as perfect—it is for them to choose.’ But here below inﬁnite perfection is inﬁnite weakness: God, in so far as he is love, hangs wholly and entirely on the Cross. . . . Simone Weil is not in any way mistaken about the dignity and necessity of temporal values. She sees them as intermediaries— metaxu—between the soul and God. ‘What is it a sacrilege to destroy? Not that which is base, for that is of no importance. Not that which is high, for we cannot touch that. The metaxu. The metaxu form the region of good and evil. . . . No human being should be deprived of these metaxu, that is to say, of those relative and mixed good things (home, country, traditions, culture, etc.) which warm and nourish the soul and without which, short of sainthood, a human life is not possible.’ But these relative and mixed good things can only be treated as such by those who, out of love for God, have passed through the total stripping; all others make them more or less into idols: ‘Only he who loves God with a supernatural love can see means simply as means.’ Whatever she may have said about ‘choice, a notion of a low xxxv xxxvi introduction level’ and about the absolute fruitlessness of voluntary action in the spiritual domain, Simone Weil does not for all that fall into quietism. On the contrary she constantly recalls that without strict diligence in our practice of the natural virtues, mystical life can be nothing but an illusion. The cause of grace dwells outside man, but its condition is within him. Simone Weil’s hatred for illusion, above all when it takes the form of sensible devotion and a kind of religious Schwärmerei, counterbalances everything which in so puriﬁed a spirituality might ﬂatter the imagination or the pride. She liked to repeat, after Saint John of the Cross, that inspiration which leads us to neglect the accomplishment of simple and lowly obligations does not come from God. ‘Duty is given us in order to kill the self. . . . We only attain to real prayer after we have worn down our own will by keeping rules.’ She regarded with such suspicion any religious exaltation unsupported by a strict ﬁdelity to the daily task that the infrequent negligences of which, largely as a result of her delicate health, she was guilty in the accomplishment of her duties caused her to have bitter doubts about the truth of her spiritual vocation. ‘All these mystical phenomena’, she wrote at the end of her life with heartrending humility, ‘are absolutely beyond me. I do not understand them. They are meant for beings who, to start with, possess the elementary moral virtues. I speak of them at random. And I am not even capable of telling myself sincerely that I speak of them at random.’ Fully sharing the political ideas of Simone Weil as I do, I think it more becoming that I should not dwell on them at great length. Any other person but myself might make something very moving out of the story of this life in which, through the inﬂuence of reﬂection and faith, an essentially revolutionary temperament was gradually impregnated with the cult of tradition and the past. For Simone Weil never ceased to be a revolutionary. She was not however pledged to a chimerical future leading men away from reality, but devoted herself more and more to revolu- introduction tion in the name of an unchanging and eternal principle—a principle which has to be constantly re-established because it constantly tends to be degraded by time. Simone Weil did not believe in an indeﬁnite perfecting of humanity: she even thought that the unfolding of history gave proof of the law of entropy rather than that of unlimited progress after the style of Condorcet. There is no need to defend her on this point. I do not see how it can be heretical to hold (in conformity with the great Greek tradition) that ‘change cannot be anything but limited and cyclic’. As for her invectives against the ‘social Beast’, however excessive a form they may sometimes take we only have to put them back into their context in order to be assured that they do not in any way constitute an apology for anarchy. ‘The social order’, she writes, ‘is irreducibly that of the prince of this world. Our only duty with regard to the social is to try to limit the evil of it. . . . Something of the social labelled divine; an intoxicating mixture which brings about every sort of licence—the devil disguised.’ But she adds immediately: ‘And yet what about a city? But that is not of the social order—it is a human environment of which we are no more conscious than of the air we breathe—a contact with nature, the past, tradition. A man’s roots are not of the social order.’ In other words, social inﬂuence is both food and poison. It is food in so far as it provides the individual with the inner equipment necessary for living as a man and for approaching God; poison in so far as it tends to rob him of his liberty and to take God’s place. The perpetual encroachments of the social order upon the divine—that incessant degradation of mystical conceptions into politics—aﬀord strong enough evidence, today more than ever, of the seriousness of this last danger. Mutatis mutandis, the same remarks are applicable to the Church. Obviously a spirit so hungering for the absolute as was that of Simone Weil would necessarily be somewhat lacking in a sense xxxvii xxxviii introduction of historical relativity: the text nolite conformari huic a seculo1 was for her a commandment allowing of no reservations. She found it very hard to understand that certain concessions of the Church to temporal exigencies did not in any way involve its eternal soul: the beatiﬁcation of Charlemagne, for instance, seemed to her a scandalous compromise with the social idol. Somewhere she speaks of the Church as ‘a great totalitarian beast’. What does that signify? Totalitarianism is characterized at the same time by a refusal of the All and by the claim to be all. As the Catholic Church is the messenger of the All here below it does not need to be totalitarian. The accusation made by Simone Weil, in so far as it is well founded, can therefore only be applicable to certain members of the body of the Church who arbitrarily bolt the doors of love and truth, thus failing to understand the universal vocation of Catholicism. There is no question of reopening here—especially at a time when so many Catholics do not hesitate to provide whips with which to beat their Master—the discussions formerly caused by the idea of ‘the Church as a body marked by sin’. We will only state that when Christ said that ‘the gates of hell should not prevail’, he did not promise that everything in the Church would remain eternally pure, but that the essential deposit of faith would be saved come what might. The Church is rooted in God: that does not exclude the possibility that the tree may bear dried-up or worm-eaten branches. To have faith is to believe that the divine sap will never fail. The preservation of this ‘incorruptible core of truth’, to use the actual expression of Simone Weil, in the midst of all the impurities mixed into the body of the Church, constitutes moreover one of the strongest proofs of the divinity of Catholicism. The Church could only become a ‘great totalitarian beast’ in so far as its human body were totally separated from its divine soul. This is an impossible hypothesis, for the gates of hell shall never 1 ‘Be not conformed to this world.’ introduction prevail. . . . Today it is seen as the last refuge of the universal faced with rampant totalitarianisms. Thus with Simone Weil the expulsion of the social idol does not lead to religious individualism. ‘The self and the social are the two great idols.’ Grace saves from the one as from the other. That is doubtless what Célestin Bouglé was trying to express in his own manner when he saw in Simone Weil while she was still a student ‘a mixture of anarchist and cleric . . .’. Simone Weil can only be understood on the level from which she speaks. Her work is addressed to souls who, if they are not stripped as naked as her own, have at least kept deep within them an aspiration for that pure goodness to which she devoted her life and her death. I am not unaware of the dangers of a spirituality such as hers. The worst forms of giddiness are caused by the highest summits. But the fact that light may burn us is not a valid reason for leaving it under a bushel. It is not a question of philosophy here but of life. Far from claiming to set up a personal system, Simone Weil strove with all her power to keep herself out of her work. Her one wish was to avoid getting in the way between God and men—to disappear ‘so that the Creator and the creature could exchange their secrets’. She cared nothing for her genius, knowing only too well that true greatness consists in learning to be nothing. ‘What does it matter what energy or gifts there may be in me? I have always enough to disappear. . . .’ She had her way: some of her texts attain to that impersonal resonance which is the sign of the highest inspiration: ‘It is impossible to forgive whoever does us harm if this harm lowers us. We have to think that it does not lower us but that it shows our true level.’ Or again: ‘If someone does me harm I must want this harm not to degrade me—this out of love for him who inﬂicted it upon me and so that he shall not really have done harm.’ It is in such ejaculations of humility and love rather than on the systematic side of her work that xxxix xl introduction Simone Weil appears as a pure messenger. I have never ceased to believe in her. In publishing the following pages I extend this conﬁdence to all the souls who shall come to her. All the writings contained in this book have been taken from the manuscripts which Simone Weil conﬁded to me personally. They were therefore all written before May 1942. More recent work, which her parents have been kind enough to show me, has not been included here. I have myself chosen the extracts from the notebooks, in which they were interspersed with innumerable quotations as well as philological and scientiﬁc studies. I hesitated between two ways of presentation: either to give the thoughts of Simone Weil one after the other in the order of their composition, or to classify them. The second method seemed preferable. I am anxious to express my thanks to all who have helped and encouraged me in this work: the Reverend Father Perrin, Lanza del Vasto, M. and Mme Honnorat (who were personal friends of Simone Weil), Gabriel Marcel and Jean de Fabrèques. In the checking and transcription of the texts M. V.-H. Debidour, who kindly helped to translate the Greek quotations incorporated in the aphorisms, and my devoted colleague Mlle Odile Keller have both given an inﬁnite amount of valuable help. G T F 1947 GRAVITY AND GRACE All the natural movements of the soul are controlled by laws analogous to those of physical gravity. Grace is the only exception. We must always expect things to happen in conformity with the laws of gravity unless there is supernatural intervention. Two forces rule the universe: light and gravity. Gravity. Generally what we expect of others depends on the eﬀect of gravity upon ourselves, what we receive from them depends on the eﬀect of gravity upon them. Sometimes (by chance) the two coincide, often they do not. What is the reason that as soon as one human being shows he needs another (no matter whether his need be slight or great) the latter draws back from him? Gravity. 2 gravity and grace Lear, a tragedy of gravity. Everything we call base is a phenomenon due to gravity. Moreover the word baseness is an indication of this fact. The object of an action and the level of the energy by which it is carried out are distinct from each other. A certain thing must be done. But where is the energy to be drawn for its accomplishment? A virtuous action can lower a man if there is not enough energy available on the same level. What is base and what is superﬁcial are on the same level. ‘His love is violent but base’: a possible sentence. ‘His love is deep but base’: an impossible one. If it be true that the same suﬀering is much harder to bear for a high motive than for a base one (the people who stood, motionless, from one to eight o’clock in the morning for the sake of having an egg, would have found it very diﬃcult to do so in order to save a human life), a base form of virtue is perhaps in some respects better able to stand the test of diﬃculties, temptations and misfortunes than a noble one. Napoleon’s soldiers. Hence the use of cruelty in order to sustain or raise the morale of soldiers. Something not to be forgotten in connexion with moral weakness. This is a particular example of the law which generally puts force on the side of baseness. Gravity is, as it were, a symbol of it. Queueing for food. The same action is easier if the motive is base than if it is noble. Base motives have in them more energy than noble ones. Problem: in what way can the energy belonging to the base motives be transferred to the noble ones? I must not forget that at certain times when my headaches were gravity and grace raging I had an intense longing to make another human being suﬀer by hitting him in exactly the same part of his forehead. Analogous desires—very frequent in human beings. When in this state, I have several times succumbed to the temptation at least to say words which cause pain. Obedience to the force of gravity. The greatest sin. Thus we corrupt the function of language, which is to express the relationship between things. Attitude of supplication: I must necessarily turn to something other than myself since it is a question of being delivered from self. Any attempt to gain this deliverance by means of my own energy would be like the eﬀorts of a cow which pulls at its hobble and so falls onto its knees. In making it one liberates a certain amount of energy in oneself by a violence which serves to degrade more energy. Compensation as in thermodynamics; a vicious circle from which one can be delivered only from on high. The source of man’s moral energy is outside him, like that of his physical energy (food, air etc.). He generally ﬁnds it, and that is why he has the illusion—as on the physical plane—that his being carries the principle of its preservation within itself. Privation alone makes him feel his need. And, in the event of privation, he cannot help turning to anything whatever which is edible. There is only one remedy for that: a chlorophyll conferring the faculty of feeding on light. Not to judge. All faults are the same. There is only one fault: incapacity to feed upon light, for where capacity to do this has been lost all faults are possible. ‘My meat is to do the will of Him that sent me.’ There is no good apart from this capacity. 3 4 gravity and grace To come down by a movement in which gravity plays no part. . . . Gravity makes things come down, wings make them rise: what wings raised to the second power can make things come down without weight? Creation is composed of the descending movement of gravity, the ascending movement of grace and the descending movement of the second degree of grace. Grace is the law of the descending movement. To lower oneself is to rise in the domain of moral gravity. Moral gravity makes us fall towards the heights. Too great aﬄiction places a human being beneath pity: it arouses disgust, horror and scorn. Pity goes down to a certain level but not below it. What does charity do in order to descend lower? Have those who have fallen so low pity on themselves? VOID AND COMPENSATION Human mechanics. Whoever suﬀers tries to communicate his suﬀering (either by ill-treating someone or calling forth their pity) in order to reduce it, and he does really reduce it in this way. In the case of a man in the uttermost depths, whom no one pities, who is without power to ill-treat anyone (if he has no child or being who loves him), the suﬀering remains within and poisons him. This is imperative, like gravity. How can one gain deliverance? How gain deliverance from a force which is like gravity? The tendency to spread evil beyond oneself: I still have it! Beings and things are not sacred enough to me. May I never sully anything, even though I be utterly transformed into mud. To sully nothing, even in thought. Even in my worst moments I would not destroy a Greek statue or a fresco by Giotto. Why anything else then? Why, for example, a moment in the life of a human being who could have been happy for that moment. 6 gravity and grace It is impossible to forgive whoever has done us harm if that harm has lowered us. We have to think that it has not lowered us, but has revealed our true level. The wish to see others suﬀer exactly what we are suﬀering. It is because of this that, except in periods of social instability, the spite of those in misfortune is directed against their fellows. That is a factor making for social stability. The tendency to spread the suﬀering beyond ourselves. If through excessive weakness we can neither call forth pity nor do harm to others, we attack what the universe itself represents for us. Then every good or beautiful thing is like an insult. To harm a person is to receive something from him. What? What have we gained (and what will have to be repaid) when we have done harm? We have gained in importance. We have expanded. We have ﬁlled an emptiness in ourselves by creating one in somebody else. To be able to hurt others with impunity—for instance to pass our anger on to an inferior who is obliged to be silent—is to spare ourselves from an expenditure of energy, an expenditure which the other person will have to make. It is the same in the case of the unlawful satisfaction of any desire. The energy we economize in this way is immediately debased. To forgive. We cannot do this. When we are harmed by someone reactions are set up within us. The desire for vengeance is a desire for essential equilibrium. We must seek equilibrium on another plane. We have to go as far as this limit by ourselves. There we reach the void. (Heaven helps those who help themselves. . . .) Headaches. At a certain moment, the pain is lessened by project- void and compensation ing it into the universe, but the universe is impaired; the pain is more intense when it comes home again, but something in me does not suﬀer and remains in contact with a universe which is not impaired. Act in the same way with the passions. Make them come down like a deposit, collect them into a point and become detached from them. Especially, treat all suﬀerings in this way. Prevent them from having access to things. The search for equilibrium is bad because it is imaginary. Revenge. Even if in fact we kill or torture our enemy it is, in a sense, imaginary. A man who lived for his city, his family, his friends, to acquire wealth, improve his social position, etc.—a war: he is led away as a slave and henceforth for evermore he must wear himself out to the utmost limit of his strength merely in order to exist. That is frightful, impossible, and for this reason he will cling to any aim which presents itself no matter how wretched, be it only to have the slave punished who works at his side. He has no more choice about aims. Any aim at all is like a branch to a drowning man. Those whose city had been destroyed and who were led away into slavery had no longer either past or future: what had they with which to ﬁll their minds? Lies and the meanest and most pitiful of covetous desires. They were perhaps more ready to risk cruciﬁxion for the sake of stealing a chicken than they had formerly been to risk death in battle for the defence of their town. This is surely so, or those frightful tortures would not have been necessary. Otherwise they had to be able to endure a void in their minds. In order to have the strength to contemplate aﬄiction when we are aﬄicted we need supernatural bread. 7 8 gravity and grace A situation which is too hard degrades us through the following process: as a general rule the energy supplied by higher emotions is limited. If the situation requires us to go beyond this limit we have to fall back on lower feelings (fear, covetousness, desire to beat the record, love of outward honours) which are richer in energy. This limitation is the key to many a retrogression. Tragedy of those who, having been guided by the love of the Good into a road where suﬀering has to be endured, after a certain time reach their limit and become debased. A rock in our path. To hurl ourselves upon this rock as though after a certain intensity of desire had been reached it could not exist any more. Or else to retreat as though we ourselves did not exist. Desire contains something of the absolute and if it fails (once its energy has been used up) the absolute is transferred to the obstacle. This produces the state of mind of the defeated, the oppressed. To grasp (in each thing) that there is a limit and that without supernatural help that limit cannot be passed—or only by very little and at the price of a terrible fall afterwards. Energy, freed by the disappearance of the objects which provide motives, always tends to go downwards. Base feelings (envy, resentment) are degraded energy. Every kind of reward constitutes a degradation of energy. Self-satisfaction over a good action (or a work of art) is a degradation of higher energy. That is why the left hand should not know . . . void and compensation A purely imaginary reward (a smile from Louis XIV) is the exact equivalent of what we have expended, for it has exactly the same value as what we have expended—unlike real rewards which, as such, are either of higher or lower value. Hence imaginary advantages alone supply the energy for unlimited eﬀort. But it is necessary that Louis XIV should really smile; if he does not, it is an unutterable deprivation. A king can only pay out imaginary rewards most of the time or he would be insolvent. It is the same with religion at a certain level. Instead of receiving the smile of Louis XIV, we invent a God who smiles on us. Or again we praise ourselves. There must be an equivalent reward. This is as inevitable as gravity. A beloved being who disappoints me. I have written to him. It is impossible that he should not reply by saying what I have said to myself in his name. Men owe us what we imagine they will give us. We must forgive them this debt. To accept the fact that they are other than the creatures of our imagination is to imitate the renunciation of God. I also am other than what I imagine myself to be. To know this is forgiveness. 9 TO ACCEPT THE VOID ‘Tradition teaches us as touching the gods and experience shows us as regards men that, by a necessity of nature, every being invariably exercises all the power of which it is capable’ (Thucydides). Like a gas, the soul tends to ﬁll the entire space which is given it. A gas which contracted leaving a vacuum—this would be contrary to the law of entropy. It is not so with the God of the Christians. He is a supernatural God, whereas Jehovah is a natural God. Not to exercise all the power at one’s disposal is to endure the void. This is contrary to all the laws of nature. Grace alone can do it. Grace ﬁlls empty spaces but it can only enter where there is a void to receive it, and it is grace itself which makes this void. The necessity for a reward, the need to receive the equivalent of what we give. But if, doing violence to this necessity, we leave a vacuum, as it were a suction of air is produced and a super- to accept the void natural reward results. It does not come if we receive other wages: it is this vacuum which makes it come. It is the same with the remission of debts (and this applies not only to the harm which others have done us but to the good which we have done them). There again, we accept a void in ourselves. To accept a void in ourselves is supernatural. Where is the energy to be found for an act which has nothing to counterbalance it? The energy has to come from elsewhere. Yet ﬁrst there must be a tearing out, something desperate has to take place, the void must be created. Void: the dark night. Admiration, pity (most of all a mixture of the two) bring real energy. But this we must do without. A time has to be gone through without any reward, natural or supernatural. The world must be regarded as containing something of a void in order that it may have need of God. That presupposes evil. To love truth means to endure the void and, as a result, to accept death. Truth is on the side of death. Man only escapes from the laws of this world in lightning ﬂashes. Instants when everything stands still, instants of contemplation, of pure intuition, of mental void, of acceptance of the moral void. It is through such instants that he is capable of the supernatural. Whoever endures a moment of the void either receives the supernatural bread or falls. It is a terrible risk, but one that must be run—even during the instant when hope fails. But we must not throw ourselves into it. 11 DETACHMENT Aﬄiction in itself is not enough for the attainment of total detachment. Unconsoled aﬄiction is necessary. There must be no consolation—no apparent consolation. Ineﬀable consolation then comes down. To forgive debts. To accept the past without asking for future compensation. To stop time at the present instant. This is also the acceptance of death. ‘He emptied himself of his divinity.’ To empty ourselves of the world. To take the form of a slave. To reduce ourselves to the point we occupy in space and time—that is to say, to nothing. To strip ourselves of the imaginary royalty of the world. Absolute solitude. Then we possess the truth of the world. Two ways of renouncing material possessions: To give them up with a view to some spiritual advantage. To conceive of them and feel them as conducive to spiritual well-being (for example: hunger, fatigue and humiliation cloud the mind and hinder meditation) and yet to renounce them. detachment Only the second kind of renunciation means nakedness of spirit. Furthermore, material goods would scarcely be dangerous if they were seen in isolation and not bound up with spiritual advantage. We must give up everything which is not grace and not even desire grace. The extinction of desire (Buddhism)—or detachment—or amor fati—or desire for the absolute good—these all amount to the same: to empty desire, ﬁnality of all content, to desire in the void, to desire without any wishes. To detach our desire from all good things and to wait. Experience proves that this waiting is satisﬁed. It is then we touch the absolute good. Always, beyond the particular object whatever it may be, we have to ﬁx our will on the void—to will the void. For the good which we can neither picture nor deﬁne is a void for us. But this void is fuller than all fullnesses. If we get as far as this we shall come through all right, for God ﬁlls the void. It has nothing to do with an intellectual process in the present-day sense. The intelligence has nothing to discover, it has only to clear the ground. It is only good for servile tasks. The good seems to us as a nothingness, since there is no thing that is good. But this nothingness is not unreal. Compared with it, everything in existence is unreal. We must leave on one side the beliefs which ﬁll up voids and sweeten what is bitter. The belief in immortality. The belief in the utility of sin: etiam peccata. The belief in the providential ordering of events—in short the ‘consolations’ which are ordinarily sought in religion. 13 14 gravity and grace To love God through and across the destruction of Troy and of Carthage—and with no consolation. Love is not consolation, it is light. The reality of the world is the result of our attachment. It is the reality of the self which we transfer into things. It has nothing to do with independent reality. That is only perceptible through total detachment. Should only one thread remain, there is still attachment. Aﬄiction which forces us to attach ourselves to the most wretched objects exposes in all its misery the true character of attachment. In this way the necessity for detachment is made more obvious. Attachment is a manufacturer of illusions and whoever wants reality ought to be detached. As soon as we know that something is real we can no longer be attached to it. Attachment is no more nor less than an insuﬃciency in our sense of reality. We are attached to the possession of a thing because we think that if we cease to possess it, it will cease to exist. A great many people do not feel with their whole soul that there is all the diﬀerence in the world between the destruction of a town and their own irremediable exile from that town. Human misery would be intolerable if it were not diluted in time. We have to prevent it from being diluted in order that it should be intolerable. ‘And when they had had their ﬁll of tears’ (Iliad).—This is another way of making the worst suﬀering bearable. We must not weep so that we may not be comforted.1 1 Yet Jesus Christ said: ‘Blessed are they that mourn’. But here Simone Weil is only condemning the tears wrung from us by the loss of temporal goods— tears which man sheds over himself. [Editor’s note.] detachment All suﬀering which does not detach us is wasted suﬀering. Nothing is more frightful, a desolate coldness, a warped soul (Ovid. Slaves in Plautus). Never to think of a thing or being we love but have not actually before our eyes without reﬂecting that perhaps this thing has been destroyed, or this person is dead. May our sense of reality not be dissolved by this thought but made more intense. Each time that we say ‘Thy will be done’ we should have in mind all possible misfortunes added together. Two ways of killing ourselves: suicide or detachment. To kill by our thought everything we love: the only way to die. Only what we love, however (‘He who hateth not his father and mother . . .’ but: ‘Love your enemies . . .’). Not to desire that what we love should be immortal. We should neither desire the immortality nor the death of any human being, whoever he may be, with whom we have to do. The miser deprives himself of his treasure because of his desire for it. If we can let our whole good rest with something hidden in the ground, why not with God? But when God has become as full of signiﬁcance as the treasure is for the miser, we have to tell ourselves insistently that he does not exist. We must experience the fact that we love him, even if he does not exist. It is he who, through the operation of the dark night, withdraws himself in order not to be loved like the treasure is by the miser. Electra weeping for the dead Orestes. If we love God while thinking that he does not exist, he will manifest his existence. 15 IMAGINATION WHICH FILLS THE VOID The imagination is continually at work ﬁlling up all the ﬁssures through which grace might pass. Every void (not accepted) produces hatred, sourness, bitterness, spite. The evil we wish for that which we hate, and which we imagine, restores the balance. The militiamen of the Spanish Testament who invented victories in order to endure death: an example of imagination ﬁlling up the void. Although we should gain nothing by the victory, we can bear to die for a cause which is going to triumph, not for one which will be defeated. For something absolutely denuded of power, it would be superhuman (the disciples of Christ). The thought of death calls for a counterweight, and this counterweight—apart from grace—cannot be anything but a lie. The imagination, ﬁller up of the void, is essentially a liar. It does imagination which fills the void away with the third dimension, for only real objects have three dimensions. It does away with multiple relationships. To try to deﬁne the things which, while they do indeed happen, yet remain in a sense imaginary. War. Crimes. Acts of revenge. Extreme aﬄiction. The crimes in Spain were actually perpetrated and yet they resembled mere acts of boastfulness. Realities which have no more dimensions than a dream. In the case of evil, as in that of dreams, there are not multiple readings.1 Hence the simplicity of criminals. Crimes ﬂat like dreams on both sides: on the side of the executioner and on the side of the victim. What is more frightful than to die in a nightmare? Compensations. Marius imagined future retribution. Napoleon thought of posterity. William II wanted a cup of tea. His imagination was not strongly enough attached to power to be able to span the years: it turned towards a cup of tea. The adoration of the great by the people in the seventeenth century (La Bruyère). This was a result of imagination ﬁlling up the void, a result which has disappeared since money has been substituted for it. Two base results, but money the baser of the two. In no matter what circumstances, if the imagination is stopped from pouring itself out we have a void (the poor in spirit). In no matter what circumstances (but sometimes at the price of how great a degradation!) imagination can ﬁll the void. This is why average human beings can become prisoners, slaves, 1 For the meaning of this word (lectures) in the vocabulary of Simone Weil, see later chapter on Readings. 17 18 gravity and grace prostitutes and pass through no matter what suﬀering without being puriﬁed. We must continually suspend the work of the imagination ﬁlling the void within ourselves. If we accept no matter what void, what stroke of fate can prevent us from loving the universe? We have the assurance that, come what may, the universe is full. RENUNCIATION OF TIME Time is an image of eternity, but it is also a substitute for eternity. The miser whose treasure has been taken from him. It is some of the frozen past which he has lost. Past and future, man’s only riches. The future is a ﬁller of void places. Sometimes the past also plays this part (‘I used to be,’ ‘I once did this or that . . .’). But there are other cases when aﬄiction makes the thought of happiness intolerable; then it robs the suﬀerer of his past (nessun maggior dolore . . .). The past and the future hinder the wholesome eﬀect of aﬄiction by providing an unlimited ﬁeld for imaginary elevation. That is why the renunciation of past and future is the ﬁrst of all renunciations. 20 gravity and grace The present does not attain ﬁnality. Nor does the future, for it is only what will be present. We do not know this, however. If we apply to the present the point of that desire within us which corresponds to ﬁnality, it pierces right through to the eternal. That is the use of despair which turns the attention away from the future. When we are disappointed by a pleasure which we have been expecting and which comes, the disappointment is because we were expecting the future, and as soon as it is there it is present. We want the future to be there without ceasing to be future. This is an absurdity of which eternity alone is the cure. Time and the cave. To come out of the cave, to be detached, means to cease to make the future our objective. A method of puriﬁcation: to pray to God, not only in secret as far as men are concerned, but with the thought that God does not exist.1 Piety with regard to the dead: to do everything for what does not exist. The suﬀering caused by the death of others is due to this pain of a void and of lost equilibrium. Eﬀorts henceforward follow without an object and therefore without a reward. If the imagination makes good this void—debasement. ‘Let the dead bury their dead.’ And as to our own death, is it not the same? The object and the reward are in the future. Deprivation of the future—void, loss of equilibrium. That is why ‘to philosophise is to learn to die’. That is why ‘to pray is like a death’. 1 God does not in fact exist in the same way as created things which form the only object of experience for our natural faculties. Therefore, contact with supernatural reality is at ﬁrst felt as an experience of nothingness. [Editor’s note.] renunciation of time When pain and weariness reach the point of causing a sense of perpetuity to be born in the soul, through contemplating this perpetuity with acceptance and love, we are snatched away into eternity. 21 TO DESIRE WITHOUT AN OBJECT Puriﬁcation is the separation of good from covetousness. We have to go down to the root of our desires in order to tear the energy from its object. That is where the desires are true in so far as they are energy. It is the object which is unreal. But there is an unspeakable wrench in the soul at the separation of a desire from its object. If we go down into ourselves we ﬁnd that we possess exactly what we desire. If we long for a certain being (who is dead), we desire a particular, limited being; therefore, necessarily, a mortal, and we long for that special being ‘who’ . . . ‘to whom’ . . ., etc., in short that being who died at such and such a time on such and such a day. And we have that being—dead. If we desire money, we want a medium of exchange (institution), something which can only be acquired on certain to desire without an object conditions, so we desire it only ‘in the measure that’ . . . Well, in that measure we have it. In such cases suﬀering, emptiness are the mode of existence of the objects of our desire. We only have to draw aside the veil of unreality and we shall see that they are given to us in this way. When we see that, we still suﬀer, but we are happy. To ascertain exactly what the miser whose treasure was stolen lost: thus we should learn much. Lauzun and the oﬃce of Captain of Musketeers. He preferred to be a prisoner and Captain of Musketeers rather than to go free and not be Captain. These are garments. ‘They were ashamed of their nakedness.’ To lose someone: we suﬀer because the departed, the absent, has become something imaginary and unreal. But our desire for him is not imaginary. We have to go down into ourselves to the abode of the desire which is not imaginary. Hunger: we imagine kinds of food, but the hunger itself is real: we have to fasten on to the hunger. The presence of the dead person is imaginary, but his absence is very real: henceforward it is his way of appearing. We must not seek the void, for it would be tempting God if we counted on supernatural bread to ﬁll it. We must not run away from it either. The void is the supreme fullness, but man is not permitted to know it. The proof is that Christ himself was at one moment completely unaware of it. One part of the self should know it, but not the other parts, for if they knew it in their base fashion, there would no longer be any void. Christ experienced all human misery, except sin. But he experienced everything which makes man capable of sin. It is the void 23 24 gravity and grace which makes man capable of sin. All sins are attempts to ﬁll voids. Thus my life with all its stains is near to his perfectly pure one, and the same is true of much lower lives. However low I fall I shall not go very far from him. But if I fall I shall no longer be able to know this. The handshake of a friend on meeting again after a long absence. I do not even notice whether it gives pleasure or pain to my sense of touch: like the blind man who feels the objects directly at the end of his stick, I feel the presence of my friend directly. It is the same with life’s circumstances, whatever they may be, and God. This implies that we should never seek consolation for pain. Because felicity is beyond the realm of consolation and pain. We become aware of it through a sense which is diﬀerent, just as the perception of objects at the end of a stick or an instrument is diﬀerent from touch in the strict sense of the word. This other sense is formed by a shifting of the attention through an apprenticeship in which the whole soul and body participate. That is why we read in the Gospel: ‘I say to you that these have received their reward.’ There must be no compensation. It is the void in our sensibility which carries us beyond sensibility. Denial of Saint Peter. To say to Christ: ‘I will never deny Thee’ was to deny him already, for it was supposing the source of faithfulness to be in himself and not in grace. Happily, as he was chosen, this denial was made manifest to all and to himself. How many others boast in the same way—and they never understand. It was diﬃcult to be faithful to Christ. A ﬁdelity in the void was needed. It was much easier to be faithful to Napoleon, even if it involved death. It was easier for the martyrs to be Faithful, later on, because the Church was already there, a force with temporal promises. We die for what is strong, not for what is weak, or only for what is weak momentarily and has still kept an to desire without an object aureole of strength. Faithfulness to Napoleon at Saint-Helena was not faithfulness in the void. The fact of dying for what is strong robs death of its bitterness—and at the same time of all its value. To implore a man is a desperate attempt through sheer intensity to make our system of values pass into him. To implore God is just the contrary: it is an attempt to make the divine values pass into ourselves. Far from thinking with all the intensity of which we are capable of the values to which we are attached, we must preserve an interior void. 25 THE SELF We possess nothing in the world—a mere chance can strip us of everything—except the power to say ‘I’. That is what we have to give to God—in other words, to destroy. There is absolutely no other free act which it is given us to accomplish—only the destruction of the ‘I’. Oﬀering: We cannot oﬀer anything but the ‘I’, and all we call an oﬀering is merely a label attached to a compensatory assertion of the ‘I’. Nothing in the world can rob us of the power to say ‘I’. Nothing except extreme aﬄiction. Nothing is worse than extreme aﬄiction which destroys the ‘I’ from outside, because after that we can no longer destroy it ourselves. What happens to those whose ‘I’ has been destroyed from outside by aﬄiction? It is not possible to imagine anything for them but annihilation according to the atheistic or materialistic conception. Though they may have lost their ‘I’, it does not mean that they the self have no more egoism. Quite the reverse. To be sure, this may occasionally happen when a dog-like devotion is brought about, but at other times the being is reduced to naked, vegetative egoism. An egoism without an ‘I’. So long as we ourselves have begun the process of destroying the ‘I’, we can prevent any aﬄiction from causing harm. For the ‘I’ is not destroyed by external pressure without a violent revolt. If for the love of God we refuse to give ourselves over to this revolt, the destruction does not take place from outside but from within. Redemptive suﬀering. If a human being who is in a state of perfection and has through grace completely destroyed the ‘I’ in himself, falls into that degree of aﬄiction which corresponds for him to the destruction of the ‘I’ from outside—we have there the cross in its fullness. Aﬄiction can no longer destroy the ‘I’ in him for the ‘I’ in him no longer exists, having completely disappeared and left the place to God. But aﬄiction produces an eﬀect which is equivalent, on the plane of perfection, to the exterior destruction of the ‘I’. It produces the absence of God. ‘My God, why hast Thou forsaken me?’ What is this absence of God produced by extreme aﬄiction within the perfect soul? What is the value which is attached to it and which is known as redemptive suﬀering? Redemptive suﬀering is that by which evil really has fullness of being to the utmost extent of its capacity. By redemptive suﬀering, God is present in extreme evil. For the absence of God is the mode of divine presence which corresponds to evil—absence which is felt. He who has not God within himself cannot feel his absence. It is the purity, the perfection, the plenitude, the abyss of evil. Whereas hell is a false abyss (cf. Thibon). Hell is superﬁcial. Hell is a nothingness which has the pretension and gives the illusion of being. 27 28 gravity and grace Purely external destruction of the ‘I’ is quasi-infernal suﬀering. External destruction with which the soul associates itself through love is expiatory suﬀering. The bringing about of the absence of God in a soul completely emptied of self through love is redemptive suﬀering. In aﬄiction the vital instinct survives all the attachments which have been torn away, and blindly fastens itself to everything which can provide it with support, like a plant fastens its tendrils. Gratitude (except in a base form) and justice are not conceivable in this state. Slavery. There is no longer the extra amount of energy required to support free-will by which man takes the measure of things. Aﬄiction, from this point of view, is hideous as life in its nakedness always is, like an amputated stump, like the swarming of insects. Life without form. Survival is then the only attachment. That is where extreme aﬄiction begins—when all other attachments are replaced by that of survival. Attachment appears then in its nakedness without any other object but itself—Hell. It is by this mechanism that to those in aﬄiction life appears as the one thing desirable, at the very time when their life is in no way preferable to death. In this state, to accept death is total detachment. Quasi-hell on earth. Complete uprooting in aﬄiction Human injustice as a general rule produces not martyrs but quasi-damned souls. Beings who have fallen into this quasi-hell are like someone stripped and wounded by robbers. They have lost the clothing of character. The greatest suﬀering which allows any of a man’s roots to remain is at an inﬁnite distance from this quasi-hell. When we do a service to beings thus uprooted and we receive in exchange discourtesy, ingratitude, betrayal, we are merely enduring a small share of their aﬄiction. It is our duty to expose the self ourselves to it in a limited measure just as it is our duty to expose ourselves to aﬄiction. When it comes we should endure it as we endure aﬄiction, without referring it back to particular people, for it cannot be referred back to anything. There is something impersonal in quasi-infernal aﬄiction as there is in perfection. For those whose ‘I’ is dead we can do nothing, absolutely nothing. We never know, however, whether in a particular person the ‘I’ is quite dead or only inanimate. If it is not quite dead, love can reanimate it as though by an injection, but it must be love which is utterly pure without the slightest trace of condescension, for the least shade of contempt drives towards death. When the ‘I’ is wounded from outside it starts by revolting in the most extreme and bitter manner like an animal at bay. But as soon as the ‘I’ is half dead, it wants to be ﬁnished oﬀ and allows itself to sink into unconsciousness. If it is then awakened by a touch of love, there is sharp pain which results in anger and sometimes hatred for whoever has provoked this pain. Hence the apparently inexplicable vindictiveness of the fallen towards their benefactors. It can also happen that the love of the benefactor is not pure. Then, in the ‘I’, awakened by love but immediately wounded afresh by contempt, there surges up the bitterest of hatreds, a hatred which is legitimate. He, on the contrary, in whom the ‘I’ is quite dead is in no way embarrassed by the love which is shown him. He takes what comes just as dogs and cats receive food, warmth and caresses, and, like them, he is eager to obtain as much as possible. As the case may be, he either attaches himself like a dog or accepts what comes to him with a certain indiﬀerence like a cat. Without the slightest scruple he absorbs all the energy of whoever tries to help him. 29 30 gravity and grace Unfortunately in every charitable work there is a danger lest the majority of its clients should be composed of people with no scruples, and above all, of people in whom the ‘I’ has been killed. The weaker the character of him who endures aﬄiction, the more quickly is the ‘I’ destroyed. To be more exact, the limit of the aﬄiction which destroys the ‘I’ is situated at a greater or lesser distance according to the quality of the character, and the further it is the more the character is said to be strong. The position of this limit, whether near or far, is probably a fact of nature in the same way as a gift for mathematics, and he who, without having any faith, is proud of preserving his morale in diﬃcult circumstances, has no more reason to be so than the youth who is conceited because mathematics come easily to him. He who believes in God is in danger of a still greater illusion—that of attributing to grace what is simply an essentially mechanical eﬀect of nature. The agony of extreme aﬄiction is the destruction of the ‘I’ from outside: Arnolphe, Phèdre, Lycaon. We are right to fall on our knees, to make abject supplication when that violent death which is going to strike us down threatens to kill the ‘I’ from outside even before life is destroyed. ‘Niobe also, of the beautiful hair, thought of eating.’ That is sublime, in the same way as space in Giotto’s frescoes. A humiliation which forces us to renounce even despair. The sin in me says ‘I’. I am all. But this particular ‘I’ is God. And it is not an ‘I’. Evil makes distinctions, it prevents God from being equivalent to all. It is because of my wretchedness that I am ‘I’. It is on account the self of the wretchedness of the universe that, in a sense, God is ‘I’ (that is to say a person). The Pharisees were people who relied on their own strength to be virtuous. Humility consists in knowing that in what we call ‘I’ there is no source of energy by which we can rise. Everything without exception which is of value in me comes from somewhere other than myself, not as a gift but as a loan which must be ceaselessly renewed. Everything without exception which is in me is absolutely valueless; and, among the gifts which have come to me from elsewhere, everything which I appropriate becomes valueless immediately I do so. Perfect joy excludes even the very feeling of joy, for in the soul ﬁlled by the object no corner is left for saying ‘I’. We cannot imagine such joys when they are absent, thus the incentive for seeking them is lacking. 31 DECREATION Decreation: to make something created pass into the uncreated. Destruction: to make something created pass into nothingness A blameworthy substitute for decreation. Creation is an act of love and it is perpetual. At each moment our existence is God’s love for us. But God can only love himself. His love for us is love for himself through us. Thus, he who gives us our being loves in us the acceptance of not being. Our existence is made up only of his waiting for our acceptance not to exist. He is perpetually begging from us that existence which he gives. He gives it to us in order to beg it from us. Relentless necessity, wretchedness, distress, the crushing burden of poverty and of labour which wears us out, cruelty, torture, violent death, constraint, disease—all these constitute divine love. It is God who in love withdraws from us so that we can love him. For if we were exposed to the direct radiance of his love, without the protection of space, of time and of matter, we should be decreation evaporated like water in the sun; there would not be enough ‘I’ in us to make it possible to surrender the ‘I’ for love’s sake. Necessity is the screen set between God and us so that we can be. It is for us to pierce through the screen so that we cease to be. There exists a ‘deifugal’ force. Otherwise all would be God. An imaginary divinity has been given to man so that he may strip himself of it like Christ did of his real divinity. Renunciation. Imitation of God’s renunciation in creation. In a sense God renounces being everything. We should renounce being something. That is our only good. We are like barrels with no bottom to them so long as we have not understood that we have a base. Elevation and abasement. A woman looking at herself in a mirror and adorning herself does not feel the shame of reducing the self, that inﬁnite being which surveys all things, to a small space. In the same way every time that we raise the ego (the social ego, the psychological ego etc.) as high as we raise it, we degrade ourselves to an inﬁnite degree by conﬁning ourselves to being no more than that. When the ego is abased (unless energy tends to raise it by desire), we know that we are not that. A very beautiful woman who looks at her reﬂection in the mirror can very well believe that she is that. An ugly woman knows that she is not that. Everything which is grasped by our natural faculties is hypothetical. It is only supernatural love that establishes anything. Thus we are co-creators. We participate in the creation of the world by decreating ourselves. 33 34 gravity and grace We only possess what we renounce; what we do not renounce escapes from us. In this sense, we cannot possess anything whatever unless it passes through God. Catholic communion. God did not only make himself ﬂesh for us once, every day he makes himself matter in order to give himself to man and to be consumed by him. Reciprocally, by fatigue, aﬄiction and death, man is made matter and is consumed by God. How can we refuse this reciprocity? He emptied himself of his divinity. We should empty ourselves of the false divinity with which we were born. Once we have understood we are nothing, the object of all our eﬀorts is to become nothing. It is for this that we suﬀer with resignation, it is for this that we act, it is for this that we pray. May God grant me to become nothing. In so far as I become nothing, God loves himself through me. There is a resemblance between the lower and the higher. Hence slavery is an image of obedience to God, humiliation an image of humility, physical necessity an image of the irresistible pressure of grace, the saints’ self-abandonment from day to day an image of the frittering away of time among criminals, prostitutes, etc. On this account it is necessary to seek out what is lowest, as an image. May that which is low in us go downwards so that what is high can go upwards. For we are wrong side upward. We are born thus. To re-establish order is to undo the creature in us. Reversal of the objective and the subjective. Similarly, reversal of the positive and the negative. That is also the meaning of the philosophy of the Upanishads. We are born and live in an inverted fashion, for we are born decreation and live in sin which is an inversion of the hierarchy. The ﬁrst operation is one of reversal—Conversion. Except the seed die. . . . It has to die in order to liberate the energy it bears within it so that with this energy new forms may be developed. So we have to die in order to liberate a tied up energy, in order to possess an energy which is free and capable of understanding the true relationship of things. The extreme diﬃculty which I often experience in carrying out the slightest action is a favour granted to me. For thus, by ordinary actions and without attracting attention, I can cut some of the roots of the tree. However indiﬀerent we may be to the opinion of others, extraordinary actions contain a stimulus which cannot be separated from them. This stimulus is quite absent from ordinary actions. To ﬁnd extraordinary diﬃculty in doing an ordinary action is a favour which calls for gratitude. We must not ask for the removal of such a diﬃculty: we must beg for grace to make good use of it. In general we must not wish for the disappearance of any of our troubles, but grace to transform them. For men of courage physical suﬀerings (and privations) are often a test of endurance and of strength of soul. But there is a better use to be made of them. For me then, may they not be that. May they rather be a testimony, lived and felt, of human misery. May I endure them in a completely passive manner. Whatever happens, how could I ever think an aﬄiction too great, since the wound of an aﬄiction and the abasement to which those whom it strikes are condemned opens to them the knowledge of human misery, knowledge which is the door of all wisdom? But pleasure, happiness, prosperity, if we know how to 35 36 gravity and grace recognize in them all that comes from outside (chance, circumstances, etc.), likewise bear testimony to human misery. They should be used in the same way. This applies even to grace, in so far as it is a sensible phenomenon. We have to be nothing in order to be in our right place in the whole. Renunciation demands that we should pass through anguish equivalent to that which would be caused in reality by the loss of all loved beings and all possession, including our faculties and attainments in the order of intelligence and character, our opinions, beliefs concerning what is good, what is stable, etc. And we must not lay these things down of ourselves but lose them—like Job. Moreover the energy thus cut oﬀ from its object should not be wasted in oscillations and degraded. The anguish should therefore be still greater than in real aﬄiction, it should not be cut up and spread over time nor oriented towards a hope. When the passion of love goes as far as vegetative energy, then we have cases like Phèdre, Arnolphe, etc.: ‘Et je sens là dedans qu’il faudra que je crève. . . .’1 Hippolyte is really more necessary to the life of Phèdre, in the most literal sense of the word, than food. In order that the love of God may penetrate as far down as that, nature has to undergo the ultimate violence. Job, the cross. . . . The love of Phèdre or of Arnolphe is impure. A love which should descend as low as theirs and yet remain pure. . . . We must become nothing, we must go down to the vegetative level; it is then that God becomes bread. If we consider what we are at a deﬁnite moment—the present 1 ‘And I feel that I must die of it. . . .’ decreation moment, cut oﬀ from the past and the future—we are innocent. We cannot at that instant be anything but what we are: all progress implies duration. It is in the order of the world at this instant that we should be such as we are. To isolate a moment in this way implies pardon. But such isolation is detachment. There are only two instants of perfect nudity and purity in human life: birth and death. It is only when newly-born or on our death-bed that we can adore God in human form without sullying the divinity. Death. An instantaneous state, without past or future. Indispensable for entering eternity. If we ﬁnd fullness of joy in the thought that God is, we must ﬁnd the same fullness in the knowledge that we ourselves are not, for it is the same thought. And this knowledge is extended to our sensibility only through suﬀering and death. Joy within God. Perfect and inﬁnite joy really exists within God. My participation can add nothing to it, my non-participation can take nothing from the reality of this perfect and inﬁnite joy. Of what importance is it then whether I am to share in it or not? Of no importance whatever. Those who wish for their salvation do not truly believe in the reality of the joy within God. Belief in immortality is harmful because it is not in our power to conceive of the soul as really incorporeal. So this belief is in fact a belief in the prolongation of life, and it robs death of its purpose. 37 38 gravity and grace The presence of God. This should be understood in two ways. As Creator, God is present in everything which exists as soon as it exists. The presence for which God needs the co-operation of the creature is the presence of God, not as Creator but as Spirit. The ﬁrst presence is the presence of creation. The second is the presence of decreation. (He who created us without our help will not save us without our consent. Saint Augustine.) God could create only by hiding himself. Otherwise there would be nothing but himself. Holiness should then be hidden too, even from consciousness in a certain measure. And it should be hidden in the world. Being and having. Being does not belong to man, only having. The being of man is situated behind the curtain, on the supernatural side. What he can know of himself is only what is lent him by circumstances. My ‘I’ is hidden for me (and for others); it is on the side of God, it is in God, it is God. To be proud is to forget that one is God. . . . The curtain is human misery: there was a curtain even for Christ. Job. Satan to God: ‘Doth he love Thee for thyself alone?’ It is a question of the level of love. Is love situated on the level of sheep, ﬁelds of corn, numerous children? Or is it situated further oﬀ, in the third dimension, behind? However deep this love may be there is a breaking-point when it succumbs, and it is this moment which transforms, which wrenches us away from the ﬁnite towards the inﬁnite, which makes the soul’s love for God transcendent in the soul. It is the death of the soul. Woe to him for whom the death of the body precedes that of the soul. The soul which is not full of love dies a bad death. Why is it necessary that such a death should happen without distinction. It must indeed be so. It is necessary that everything should happen without distinction. decreation Appearance clings to being, and pain alone can tear them from each other. For whoever is in possession of being there can be no appearance. Appearance chains being down. Time in its course tears appearance from being and being from appearance by violence. Time makes it manifest that it is not eternity. It is necessary to uproot oneself. To cut down the tree and make of it a cross, and then to carry it every day. It is necessary not to be ‘myself ’, still less to be ‘ourselves’. The city gives us the feeling of being at home. We must take the feeling of being at home into exile. We must be rooted in the absence of a place. To uproot oneself socially and vegetatively. To exile oneself from every earthly country. To do all that to others, from the outside, is a substitute (ersatz) for decreation. It results in unreality. But by uprooting oneself one seeks greater reality. 39 SELF-EFFACEMENT God gave me being in order that I should give it back to him. It is like one of those traps whereby the characters are tested in fairy stories and tales on initiation. If I accept this gift it is bad and fatal; its virtue becomes apparent through my refusal of it. God allows me to exist outside himself. It is for me to refuse this authorization. Humility is the refusal to exist outside God. It is the queen of virtues. The self is only the shadow which sin and error cast by stopping the light of God, and I take this shadow for a being. Even if we could be like God it would be better to be mud which obeys God. To be what the pencil is for me when, blindfold, I feel the table by means of its point—to be that for Christ. It is possible for us to be mediators between God and the part of creation which is conﬁded to us. Our consent is necessary in order that he may self-effacement perceive his own creation through us. With our consent he performs this marvel. If I knew how to withdraw from my own soul it would be enough to enable this table in front of me to have the incomparable good fortune of being seen by God. God can love in us only this consent to withdraw in order to make way for him, just as he himself, our creator, withdrew in order that we might come into being. This double operation has no other meaning than love, it is like a father giving his child something which will enable the child to give a present on his father’s birthday. God who is no other thing but love has not created anything other than love. All the things that I see, hear, breathe, touch, eat; all the beings I meet—I deprive the sum total of all that of contact with God, and I deprive God of contact with all that in so far as something in me says ‘I’. I can do something for all that and for God—namely, retire and respect the tête-à-tête. The strict carrying out of ordinary human duty is a condition which makes my withdrawal possible. Little by little it wears away the ropes which fasten me to the spot and prevent me from retiring. I cannot conceive the necessity for God to love me, when I feel so clearly that even with human beings aﬀection for me can only be a mistake. But I can easily imagine that he loves that perspective of creation which can only be seen from the point where I am. But I act as a screen. I must withdraw so that he may see it. I must withdraw so that God may make contact with the beings whom chance places in my path and whom he loves. It is tactless for me to be there. It is as though I were placed between two lovers or two friends. I am not the maiden who awaits her betrothed, but the unwelcome third who is with two betrothed lovers and ought to go away so that they can really be together. 41 42 gravity and grace If only I knew how to disappear there would be a perfect union of love between God and the earth I tread, the sea I hear . . . What do the energy, the gifts, etc. which are in me matter? I always have enough of them to disappear. ‘Et la mort à mes yeux ravissant la clarté Rend au jour qu’ils souillaient toute sa pureté. . . .’1 May I disappear in order that those things that I see may become perfect in their beauty from the very fact that they are no longer things that I see. I do not in the least wish that this created world should fade from my view, but that it should no longer be to me personally that it shows itself. To me it cannot tell its secret which is too high. If I go, then the creator and the creature will exchange their secrets. To see a landscape as it is when I am not there. . . . When I am in any place, I disturb the silence of heaven and earth by my breathing and the beating of my heart. 1 ‘And death, robbing my eyes of their light, Restores to the day they sullied all in purity . . . NECESSITY AND OBEDIENCE The sun shines on the just and on the unjust. . . . God makes himself necessity. There are two aspects of necessity: it is exercised, it is endured: the sun and the cross. We have to consent to be subject to necessity and to act only by handling it. Subordination: economy of energy. Thanks to this, an act of heroism can be performed without there being any need for the person who commands or the one who obeys to be a hero. We have to attain to receiving orders from God. In which cases does the struggle against temptation exhaust the energy attached to goodness and in which cases does it make it rise higher in the scale of qualities of energy? This must depend on the respective importance of the parts played by the will and the attention. 44 gravity and grace We have to deserve, by the strength of our love, to suﬀer constraint. Obedience is the supreme virtue. We have to love necessity. Necessity is what is lowest in relation to the individual (constraint, force, a ‘hard fate’); universal necessity brings deliverance from this. There are cases where a thing is necessary from the mere fact that it is possible. Thus to eat when we are hungry, to give a wounded man, dying of thirst, something to drink when there is water quite near. Neither a ruﬃan nor a saint would refrain from doing so. By analogy, we have to discern the cases in which, although it does not appear so clearly at ﬁrst sight, the possibility implies a necessity, we must act in these cases and not in the others. The pomegranate seed. We do not pledge ourselves to love God, we give our consent to the engagement which has been formed within us in spite of ourselves. We should do only those righteous actions which we cannot stop ourselves from doing, which we are unable not to do, but, through well directed attention, we should always keep on increasing the number of those which we are unable not to do. We should not take one step, even in the direction of what is good, beyond that to which we are irresistibly impelled by God, and this applies to action, word and thought. But we should be willing to go anywhere under his impulsion, even to the farthest limit (the cross). . . . To be willing to go as far as possible is to pray to be impelled, but without knowing whither. If my eternal salvation were on this table in the form of an object necessity and obedience and if I only had to stretch out my hand to grasp it, I would not stretch out my hand without having received orders to do so. Detachment from the fruits of action. To escape from inevitability of this kind. How? To act not for an object but from necessity. I cannot do otherwise. It is not an action but a sort of passivity. Inactive action. The slave is in a sense a model (the lowest . . . the highest . . . always this same law). So also is matter. To transfer the source of our actions outside ourselves. To be impelled. The purest of motives (or the basest: the law is always the same) appear as something exterior. Every act should be considered from the point of view not of its object but of its impulsion. The question is not ‘What is the aim?’ It is ‘What is the origin?’ ‘I was naked, and ye clothed me.’ This gift is simply an indication of the state of those who acted in this way. They were in a state which made it impossible for them not to feed the hungry and to clothe the naked; they did not in any way do it for Christ, they could not help doing it because the compassion of Christ was in them. It was the same with Saint Nicholas who, when going across the Russian Steppes with Saint Cassian to meet God, could not help being late for the appointed time of meeting because he had to help a poor peasant to move his cart which had stuck in the mud. Good which is done in this way, almost in spite of ourselves, almost shamefacedly and apologetically, is pure. All absolutely pure goodness completely eludes the will. Goodness is transcendent. God is Goodness. ‘I was an hungred, and ye gave me meat.’ When was that, Lord? They did not know. We must not know when we do such acts. We must not help our neighbour for Christ but in Christ. May 45 46 gravity and grace the self disappear in such a way that Christ can help our neighbour through the medium of our soul and body. May we be the slave whom his master sends to bear help to someone in misfortune. The help comes from the master, but it is intended for the suﬀerer. Christ did not suﬀer for his Father. He suﬀered for men by the Father’s will. We cannot say of the slave who goes oﬀ bearing help that he is doing it for his master. He is doing nothing. Even though in order to reach the suﬀerer he had to walk barefoot over nails, he would suﬀer but he would not be doing anything. For he is a slave. ‘We are unproﬁtable servants’: that means we have done nothing. In general the expression ‘for God’ is a bad one. God ought not to be put in the dative. We should not go to our neighbour for the sake of God, but we should be impelled towards our neighbour by God, as the arrow is driven towards its target by the archer. To be only an intermediary between the uncultivated ground and the ploughed ﬁeld, between the data of a problem and the solution, between the blank page and the poem, between the starving beggar and the beggar who has been fed. With all things, it is always what comes to us from outside, freely and by surprise as a gift from heaven, without our having sought it, that brings us pure joy. In the same way real good can only come from outside ourselves, never from our own eﬀort. We cannot under any circumstances manufacture something which is better than ourselves. Thus eﬀort truly stretched towards goodness cannot reach its goal; it is after long, fruitless eﬀort which ends in despair, when we no longer expect anything, that, from outside ourselves, the gift comes as a marvellous surprise. The eﬀort has destroyed a part of the false sense of fullness necessity and obedience within us. The divine emptiness, fuller than fullness, has come to inhabit us. The will of God. How to know it? If we make a quietness within ourselves, if we silence all desires and opinions and if with love, without formulating any words, we bind our whole soul to think ‘Thy will be done’, the thing which after that we feel sure we should do (even though in certain respects we may be mistaken) is the will of God. For if we ask him for bread he will not give us a stone. Convergency as a criterion. An action or attitude for which reason aﬀords several distinct and convergent motives, but which we feel transcends all imaginable motives. In prayer we must not have in view any particular thing, unless by supernatural inspiration, for God is the universal being. To be sure, he descends into the realm of particular things. He has descended, he descends in the act of creation; as also in the Incarnation, the Eucharist, Inspiration, etc. But the movement comes from above, never from below; it is a movement on God’s part, not on ours. We cannot bring about such intercommunion except when God decrees it. Our rôle is to be ever turned towards the universal. There perhaps we have the solution to Berger’s diﬃculty about the impossibility of a union between the relative and the absolute. It cannot be achieved by a movement rising from below, but it is possible by a descending movement from on high. We can never know that God commands a certain thing. Intention directed towards obedience to God saves us, whatever we do, if we place God inﬁnitely above us, and damns us, whatever we do, if we call our own heart God. In the ﬁrst case we never think what we have done, what we are doing or what we are going to do can be good. 47 48 gravity and grace The use of temptations. It depends on the relative strength of the soul and of time. To go on for a long time contemplating the possibility of doing evil without doing it eﬀects a kind of transubstantiation. If we resist with merely ﬁnite energy, this energy is exhausted after a certain time, and when it is exhausted we give in. If we remain motionless and attentive it is the temptation which is exhausted—and we acquire the energy raised to a higher degree. If, in the same way—that is to say motionless and attentive— we contemplate the possibility of doing good, a transubstantiation of energy is brought about in this case also, and thanks to it we accomplish the good we have been considering. The transubstantiation of the energy consists in the fact that, where what is good is concerned, a moment comes when we cannot help doing it. This, moreover, provides a criterion of good and evil. Every creature which attains perfect obedience constitutes a special, unique, irreplaceable form of the presence, knowledge and operation of God in the world. Necessity. We have to see things in their right relationship and ourselves, including the purposes we bear within us, as one of the terms of that relationship. Action follows naturally from this. Obedience. There are two kinds. We can obey the force of gravity or we can obey the relationship of things. In the ﬁrst case we do what we are driven to by the imagination which ﬁlls up empty spaces. We can aﬃx a variety of labels to it, often with a show of truth, including righteousness and God. if we suspend the ﬁlling up activity of the imagination and ﬁx our attention on the relationship of things, a necessity becomes apparent which we cannot help obeying. Until then we have not any notion of necessity and we have no sense of obedience. necessity and obedience After that we cannot be proud of what we do, even though we may accomplish marvels. The words of the Breton ship’s boy to the journalist who asked him how he had been able to act as he did: ‘There was nothing else for it’—the purest heroism—more frequent among the poor than elsewhere. Obedience is the only pure motive, the only one which does not in the slightest degree seek a reward for the action, but leaves all care of reward to the Father who is in secret and who sees in secret. The obedience must, however, be obedience to necessity and not to force (terrible void in the case of slaves). However much we give of ourselves to others or to a great cause, whatever suﬀering we endure, if it is out of pure obedience to a clear conception of the relationship of things and to necessity, we make up our minds to it without eﬀort although we accomplish it with eﬀort. We cannot do otherwise, and there is no reversal, no void to be ﬁlled, no thought of reward, no spite, no loss of dignity. Action is the pointer of the balance. We must not touch the pointer but the weight. Exactly the same rule applies to opinions. If we fail to observe it there is either confusion or suﬀering. The Foolish Virgins—The meaning of this story is that at the moment when we become conscious that we have to make a choice, the choice is already made for good or ill. This is much truer than the allegory about Hercules between virtue and vice. When the inward nature of man, cut oﬀ from all carnal 49 50 gravity and grace inﬂuences and deprived of all supernatural light, performs actions which are in conformity with those which supernatural light would impose if it were present, there is utter purity. That is the central point of the Passion. In contemplation, the right relationship with God is love, in action it is slavery. This distinction must be kept. We must act as becomes a slave while contemplating with love. . . . ILLUSIONS We are drawn towards a thing because we believe it is good. We end by being chained to it because it has become necessary. Things of the senses are real if they are considered as perceptible things, but unreal if considered as goods. Appearance has the completeness of reality, but only as appearance. As anything other than appearance it is error. Illusions about the things of this world do not concern their existence but their value. The image of the cave refers to values. We only possess shadowy imitations of good. It is also in relation to good that we are chained down like captives (attachment). We accept the false values which appear to us and when we think we are acting we are in reality motionless, for we are still conﬁned in the same system of values. Actions eﬀectively carried out and yet imaginary. A man 52 gravity and grace attempts suicide, recovers and is no more detached afterwards than he was before. His suicide was imaginary. Suicide is probably never anything else, and that is why it is forbidden. Strictly speaking time does not exist (except within the limit of the present), yet we have to submit to it. Such is our condition. We are subject to that which does not exist. Whether it is a question of passively borne duration—physical pain, waiting, regret, remorse, fear—or of organized time—order, method, necessity—in both cases that to which we are subject does not exist. But our submission exists. We are really bound by unreal chains. Time which is unreal casts over all things including ourselves a veil of unreality. The miser’s treasure is the shadow of an imitation of what is good. It is doubly unreal. For, to start with, a means to an end (such as money) is, in itself, something other than a good. But diverted from its function as a means and set up as an end, it is still further from being a good. It is with regard to the assessment of values that our senseperceptions are unreal, since things are unreal for us as values. But to attribute a false value to an object also takes reality from the perception of this object, because it submerges perception in imagination. Thus perfect detachment alone enables us to see things in their naked reality, outside the fog of deceptive values. That is why ulcers and the dung-heap were necessary before Job could receive the revelation of the world’s beauty. For there is no detachment where there is no pain. And there is no pain endured without hatred or lying unless detachment is present also. The soul which has poked its head out of heaven devours the being. The soul which has remained inside devours opinion. illusions Necessity is essentially a stranger to the imaginary. What is real in perception and distinguishes it from dreams is not the sensations, but the necessity enshrined in these sensations. ‘Why these things and not others?’ ‘Because that is how it is.’ In the spiritual life illusion and truth are distinguished in the same way. What is real in perception and distinguishes it from dreams is not sensations but necessity. There is a distinction between those who remain inside the cave, shutting their eyes and imagining the journey, and those who really take it. In the spiritual realm also we have real and imaginary, and there also it is necessity which makes the diﬀerence—not simply suﬀering, because there are imaginary suﬀerings. As for inner feelings, nothing is more deceptive. How can we distinguish the imaginary from the real in the spiritual realm? We must prefer real hell to an imaginary paradise. That which distinguishes higher states from lower ones is the coexistence in the higher states of several superposed planes. Humility has as its object to eliminate that which is imaginary in spiritual progress. There is no harm in thinking ourselves far less advanced than we are: the eﬀect of the light is in no way decreased thereby for its source is not in opinion. There is great harm in thinking ourselves more advanced, because then opinion has an eﬀect. A test of what is real is that it is hard and rough. Joys are found in it, not pleasure. What is pleasant belongs to dreams. 53 54 gravity and grace We must try to love without imagining—to love the appearance in its nakedness without interpretation. What we love then is truly God. After having experienced the absolute good, we ﬁnd the illusory and partial aspects of goods once more, but in a hierarchical order, so that we only allow ourselves to seek one such aspect within a limit where it does not interfere with the care due to another. This order is transcendent in relation to the aspects of goods which it connects together and it is a reﬂection of the absolute good. Already discursive reason (the understanding of relationships) helps to break down idolatries by considering good and evil things as limited, merging, overlapping. We must recognize the point at which good passes into evil: in so far as, to the extent that, having regard to, etc. We must get further than the rule of three. There is always a relationship to time to be taken into account. We must get rid of the illusion of possessing time. We must become incarnate. Man has to perform an act of incarnation, for he is disembodied (désincarné) by his imagination. What comes to us from Satan is our imagination. Cure for imaginary love. To give God the strict minimum in us, what it is absolutely impossible for us to refuse him—and desire that one day, and as soon as possible, this strict minimum may become all. Transposition: we believe we are rising because while keeping the same base inclinations (for instance; the desire to triumph over others) we have given them a noble object. We should, on the contrary, rise by attaching noble inclinations to lowly objects. illusions All the passions produce prodigies. A gambler is capable of watching and fasting almost like a saint, he has his premonitions, etc. There is great danger in loving God as the gambler loves his game. We must be careful about the level on which we place the inﬁnite. If we place it on the level which is only suitable for the ﬁnite it will matter very little what name we give it. The lower parts of my nature should love God, but not too much, for then it would not be God. May their love be like hunger and thirst. Only the highest has the right to be satisﬁed. Fear of God in Saint John of the Cross. Is this not the fear of thinking about God when we are unworthy; of sullying him by thinking about him wrongly? Through such fear the lower parts of our nature draw away from God. The ﬂesh is dangerous in so far as it refuses to love God, but also in so far as without ﬁtting modesty it pushes itself forward to love him. Why is the determination to ﬁght against a prejudice a sure sign that one is full of it? Such a determination necessarily arises from an obsession. It constitutes an utterly sterile eﬀort to get rid of it. In such a case the light of attention is the only thing which is eﬀective, and it is not compatible with a polemical intention. All the Freudian system is impregnated with the prejudice which it makes it its mission to ﬁght—the prejudice that everything sexual is vile. There is an essential diﬀerence between the mysticism which 55 56 gravity and grace turns towards God the faculty of love and desire of which sexual energy constitutes the physiological foundation, and the false imitation of mysticism which, without changing the natural orientation of this faculty, gives it an imaginary object upon which it stamps the name of God as a label. To discriminate between these two operations, of which the second is still lower than debauchery, is diﬃcult, but it is possible. God and the supernatural are hidden and formless in the universe. It is well that they should be hidden and nameless in the soul. Otherwise there would be a risk of having something imaginary under the name of God (those who fed and clothed Christ did not know that it was Christ). This is the meaning of the ancient mysteries. Christianity (Catholic and Protestant) speaks too much about holy things. Morality and literature. Imagination and ﬁction go to make up more than three-quarters of our real life. Rare indeed are the true contacts with good and evil. A science which does not bring us nearer to God is worthless. But if it brings us to him in the wrong way, that is to say if it brings us to an imaginary God, it is worse. . . . It is bad to think that I am the author of the operations which nature mechanically performs in me: it is still worse to think that the Holy Spirit is the author of them. That is still farther from the truth. Diﬀerent types of correlation and passage from one opposite to another: Through total devotion to something great (including God), giving free licence to our lower nature. Through contemplation of the inﬁnite distance between the illusions self and what is great, making of the self an instrument of greatness. By what criterion can they be distinguished? I think the only criterion is that bad correlation removes the limits from that which is rightly limited. If we except the highest forms of sanctity and genius, that which gives the impression of being true in man is almost bound to be false, and that which is true is almost bound to give the impression of being false. Work is needed to express what is true: also to receive what is true. We can express and receive what is false, or at least what is superﬁcial, without any work. When truth appears at least as true as falsehood it is a triumph of sanctity or of genius. Thus Saint Francis made his audience cry just like a cheap theatrical preacher would have done. Duration, whether of centuries in the case of civilizations or of years and decades for individuals, has the Darwinian function of eliminating the unﬁt. That which is ﬁtted for all things is eternal. In this alone lies the value of what we call experience. But falsehood is an armour by means of which man often enables what is unﬁt in him to survive events which, were it not for such armour, would destroy it (thus pride manages to survive humiliations), and this armour is as it were secreted by what is unﬁt in order to ward oﬀ the danger (in humiliation, pride makes thicker the inner falsehood which covers it). There is as it were a phagocytosis in the soul: everything which is threatened by time secretes falsehood in order not to die, and in proportion to the danger it is in of dying. That is why there is not any love of truth without an unconditional acceptance of death. The cross of Christ is the only gateway to knowledge. I should look upon every sin I have committed as a favour of 57 58 gravity and grace God. It is a favour that the essential imperfection which is hidden in my depths should have been to some extent made dear to me on a certain day, at a certain time, in certain circumstances. I wish and implore that my imperfection may be wholly revealed to me in so far as human thought is capable of grasping it. Not in order that it may be cured but, even if it should not be cured, in order that I may know the truth. Everything that is worthless shuns the light. Here on earth we can hide ourselves beneath the ﬂesh. At death we can do this no longer. We are given up naked to the light. That means hell, purgatory or paradise as the case may be. That which makes us hold back from the eﬀort which would bring us nearer to what is good is the repugnance of the ﬂesh, but it is not the ﬂesh’s repugnance in the face of eﬀort. It is the ﬂesh’s repugnance in the face of what is good, because for a bad cause, if there were a strong enough incentive, the ﬂesh would consent to anything, knowing it could do so without dying. Death itself, endured for a bad cause, is not really death for the carnal part of the soul. What is mortal for the carnal part of the soul is to see God face to face. That is why we ﬂy from the inner void since God might steal into it. It is not the pursuit of pleasure and the aversion for eﬀort which causes sin, but fear of God. We know that we cannot see him face to face without dying and we do not want to die. We know that sin preserves us very eﬀectively from seeing him face to face: pleasure and pain merely provide us with the slight indispensable impetus towards sin, and above all the pretext or alibi which is still more indispensable. In the same way as pretexts are necessary for unjust wars, a promise of some false good is necessary for sin, because we cannot endure the thought that we are going in the direction of evil. It is not the ﬂesh which illusions keeps us away from God; the ﬂesh is the veil we place before us to shield us from him. This is perhaps not the case until after a certain point has been reached. The image of the cave seems to suggest as much. At ﬁrst it is movement which hurts. When we reach the opening it is the light. It not only blinds but wounds us. Our eyes turn away from it. May it not be true that from that moment onwards mortal sins are the only kind we can any longer commit? To use the ﬂesh to hide ourselves from the light—is not that a mortal sin? A horrible idea. Leprosy is preferable. I need God to take me by force, because, if death, doing away with the shield of the ﬂesh, were to put me face to face with him, I should run away. 59 IDOLATRY Idolatry comes from the fact that, while thirsting for absolute good, we do not possess the power of supernatural attention and we have not the patience to allow it to develop. Lacking idols, it often happens that we have to labour every day, or nearly every day, in the void. We cannot do so without supernatural bread. Idolatry is thus a vital necessity in the cave. Even with the best of us it is inevitable that it should set narrow limits for mind and heart. Ideas are changeable, they are inﬂuenced by the passions, by fancy, by fatigue. Activity has to be constant. It has to continue each day and for many hours each day. Motives for our activity are therefore needed which shall be independent of our thoughts, hence of our relationships: idols. All men are ready to die for what they love. They diﬀer only idolatry through the level of the thing loved and the concentration or diﬀusion of their love. No one loves himself. Man would like to be an egoist and cannot. This is the most striking characteristic of his wretchedness and the source of his greatness. Man always devotes himself to an order. Only, unless there is supernatural illumination, this order has as its centre either himself or some particular being or thing (possibly an abstraction) with which he has identiﬁed himself (e.g. Napoleon, for his soldiers, Science, or some political party, etc.). It is a perspective order. We do not have to acquire humility. There is humility in us— only we humiliate ourselves before false gods. 61 LOVE Love is a sign of our wretchedness. God can only love himself. We can only love something else. God’s love for us is not the reason for which we should love him. God’s love for us is the reason for us to love ourselves. How could we love ourselves without this motive? It is impossible for man to love himself except in this roundabout way. If my eyes are blindfolded and if my hands are chained to a stick, this stick separates me from things but I can explore them by means of it. It is only the stick which I feel, it is only the wall which I perceive. It is the same with creatures and the faculty of love. Supernatural love touches only creatures and goes only to God. It is only creatures which it loves (what else have we to love?), but it loves them as intermediaries. For this reason it loves all creatures equally, itself included. To love a stranger as oneself implies the reverse: to love oneself as a stranger. love Love of God is pure when joy and suﬀering inspire an equal degree of gratitude. Love on the part of someone who is happy is the wish to share the suﬀering of the beloved who is unhappy. Love on the part of someone who is unhappy is to be ﬁlled with joy by the mere knowledge that his beloved is happy without sharing in this happiness or even wishing to do so. In Plato’s eyes, carnal love is a degraded image of true love. Chaste human love (conjugal ﬁdelity) is a less degraded image of it. Only in the stupidity of the present day could the idea of sublimation arise. The Love of Phaedrus. He neither exercises force nor submits to it. That constitutes the only purity. Contact with the sword causes the same deﬁlement whether it be through the handle or the point. For him who loves, its metallic coldness will not destroy love, but will give the impression of being abandoned by God. Supernatural love has no contact with force, but at the same time it does not protect the soul against the coldness of force, the coldness of steel. Only an earthly attachment, if it has in it enough energy, can aﬀord protection from the coldness of steel. Armour, like the sword, is made of metal. Murder freezes the soul of the man who loves only with a pure love, whether he be the author or the victim, so likewise does everything which, without going so far as actual death, constitutes violence. If we want to have a love which will protect the soul from wounds, we must love something other than God. Love tends to go ever further and further, but there is a limit. When the limit is passed love turns to hate. To avoid this change love has to become diﬀerent. 63 64 gravity and grace Among human beings, only the existence of those we love is fully recognized. Belief in the existence of other human beings as such is love. The mind, is not forced to believe in the existence of anything (subjectivism, absolute idealism, solipsism, scepticism: c.f. the Upanishads, the Taoists and Plato, who, all of them, adopt this philosophical attitude by way of puriﬁcation). That is why the only organ of contact with existence is acceptance, love. That is why beauty and reality are identical. That is why joy and the sense of reality are identical. This need to be the creator of what we love is a need to imitate God. But the divinity towards which it tends is false, unless we have recourse to the model seen from the other, the heavenly side. . . . Pure love of creatures is not love in God, but love which has passed through God as through ﬁre. Love which detaches itself completely from creatures to ascend to God and comes down again associated with the creative love of God. Thus the two opposities which rend human love are united: to love the beloved being just as he is, and to want to recreate him. Imaginary love of creatures. We are attached by a cord to all the objects of attachment, and a cord can always be cut. We are also attached by a cord to the imaginary God, the God for whom love is also an attachment. But to the real God we are not attached and that is why there is no cord which can be cut. He enters into us. He alone can enter into us. All other things remain outside and our knowledge of them is conﬁned to the tensions of varying degree and direction which aﬀect love the cord when there is a change of position on their part or on ours. Love needs reality. What is more terrible than the discovery that through a bodily appearance we have been loving an imaginary being. It is much more terrible than death, for death does not prevent the beloved from having lived. That is the punishment for having fed love on imagination. It is an act of cowardice to seek from (or to wish to give) the people we love any other consolation than that which works of art give us. These help us through the mere fact that they exist. To love and to be loved only serves mutually to render this existence more concrete, more constantly present to the mind. But it should be present as the source of our thoughts, not as their object. If there are grounds for wishing to be understood, it is not for ourselves but for the other, in order that we may exist for him. Everything which is vile or second-rate in us revolts against purity and needs, in order to save its own life, to soil this purity. To soil is to modify, it is to touch. The beautiful is that which we cannot wish to change. To assume power over is to soil. To possess is to soil. To love purely is to consent to distance, it is to adore the distance between ourselves and that which we love. The imagination is always united with a desire, that is to say a value. Only desire without an object is empty of imagination. There is the real presence of God in everything which imagination does not veil. The beautiful takes our desire captive and empties it of its object, giving it an object which is present and thus forbidding it to ﬂy oﬀ towards the future. Such is the price of chaste love. Every desire for enjoyment 65 66 gravity and grace belongs to the future and the world of illusion, whereas if we desire only that a being should exist, he exists: what more is there to desire? The beloved being is then naked and real, not veiled by an imaginary future. The miser never looks at his treasure without imagining it n times larger. It is necessary to be dead in order to see things in their nakedness. Thus in love there is chastity or the lack of chastity according to whether the desire is or is not directed towards the future. In this sense, and on condition that it is not turned towards a pseudo-immortality conceived on the model of the future, the love we devote to the dead is perfectly pure. For it is the desire for a life which is ﬁnished, which can no longer give anything new. We desire that the dead man should have existed, and he has existed. Wherever the spirit ceases to be a principle it also ceases to be an end. Hence the close connexion between collective ‘thought’ under all its forms and the loss of the sense of and respect for souls. The soul is the human being considered as having a value in itself. To love the soul of a woman is not to think of her a serving one’s own pleasure, etc. Love no longer knows how to contemplate, it wants to possess (disappearance of Platonic love).1 It is a fault to wish to be understood before we have made ourselves clear to ourselves. It is to seek pleasures in friendship and pleasures which are not deserved. It is something which corrupts even more than love. You would sell your soul for friendship. Learn to thrust friendship aside, or rather the dream of friend1 Here ‘Platonic’ love has nothing to do with what today goes by the same name. It does not proceed from the imagination but from the soul. It is purely spiritual contemplation. Cf. later, in the chapter on Beauty. [Editor’s note.] love ship. To desire friendship is a great fault. Friendship should be a gratuitous joy like those aﬀorded by art or life. We must refuse it so that we may be worthy to receive it; it is of the order of grace (‘Depart from me, O Lord. . . .’). It is one of those things which are added unto us. Every dream of friendship deserves to be shattered. It is not by chance that you have never been loved. . . . To wish to escape from solitude is cowardice. Friendship is not to be sought, not to be dreamed, not to be desired; it is to be exercised (it is a virtue). We must have done with all this impure and turbid border of sentiment. Schluss! Or rather (for we must not prune too severely within ourselves), everything in friendship which does not pass into real exchanges should pass into considered thoughts. It serves no useful purpose to do without the inspiring virtue of friendship. What should be severely forbidden is to dream of its sentimental joys. That is corruption. Moreover it is as stupid as to dream about music or painting. Friendship cannot be separated from reality any more than the beautiful. It is a miracle, like the beautiful. And the miracle consists simply in the fact that it exists. At the age of twenty-ﬁve, it is high time to have done with adolescence once and for all. . . . Do not allow yourself to be imprisoned by any aﬀection. Keep your solitude. The day, if it ever comes, when you are given true aﬀection there will be no opposition between interior solitude and friendship, quite the reverse. It is even by this infallible sign that you will recognize it. Other aﬀections have to be severely disciplined. The same words (e.g. a man says to his wife: ‘I love you’) can be commonplace or extraordinary according to the manner in which they are spoken. And this manner depends on the depth of the region in a man’s being from which they proceed without the will being able to do anything. And by a marvellous 67 68 gravity and grace agreement they reach the same region in him who hears them. Thus the hearer can discern, if he has any power of discernment, what is the value of the words. Benefaction is permissible precisely because it constitutes a humiliation still greater than pain, a still more intimate and undeniable proof of dependence. And gratitude is prescribed for the same reason, since therein lies the use to be made of the received beneﬁt. The dependence, however, must be on fate and not on any particular human being. That is why the benefactor is under an obligation to keep himself entirely out of the benefaction. Moreover the gratitude must not in any degree constitute an attachment, for that is the gratitude proper to dogs. Gratitude is ﬁrst of all the business of him who helps, if the help is pure. It is only by virtue of reciprocity that it is due from him who is helped. In order to feel true gratitude (the case of friendship being set aside), I have to think that it is not out of pity, sympathy or caprice that I am being treated well, it is not as a favour or privilege, nor as a natural result of temperament, but from a desire to do what justice demands. Accordingly he who treats me thus wishes that all who are in my situation may be treated in the same way by all who are in his own. EVIL Creation: good broken up into pieces and scattered throughout evil. Evil is limitless but it is not inﬁnite. Only the inﬁnite limits the limitless. Monotony of evil: never anything new, everything about it is equivalent. Never anything real, everything about it is imaginary. It is because of this monotony that quantity plays so great a part. A host of women (Don Juan) or of men (Célimène), etc. One is condemned to false inﬁnity. That is hell itself. Evil is licence and that is why it is monotonous: everything has to be drawn from ourselves. But it is not given to man to create, so it is a bad attempt to imitate God. Not to recognize and accept this impossibility of creating is the source of many an error. We are obliged to imitate the act of 70 gravity and grace creation, and there are two possible imitations—the one real and the other apparent—preserving and destroying. There is no trace of ‘I’ in the act of preserving. There is in that of destroying. The ‘I’ leaves its mark on the world as it destroys. Literature and morality. Imaginary evil is romantic and varied; real evil is gloomy, monotonous, barren, boring. Imaginary good is boring; real good is always new, marvellous, intoxicating. Therefore ‘imaginative literature’ is either boring or immoral (or a mixture of both). It only escapes from this alternative if in some way it passes over to the side of reality through the power of art—and only genius can do that. A certain inferior kind of virtue is good’s degraded image, of which we have to repent, and of which it is more diﬃcult to repent than it is of evil—The Pharisee and the Publican. Good as the opposite of evil is, in a sense, equivalent to it, as is the way with all opposites. It is not good which evil violates, for good is inviolate: only a degraded good can be violated. That which is the direct opposite of an evil never belongs to the order of higher good. It is often scarcely any higher than evil! Examples: theft and the bourgeois respect for property, adultery and the ‘respectable woman’; the savings-bank and waste; lying and ‘sincerity’. Good is essentially other than evil. Evil is multifarious and fragmentary, good is one, evil is apparent, good is mysterious; evil consists in action, good in non-action, in activity which does not act, etc.—Good considered on the level of evil and measured against it as one opposite against another is good of the penal evil code order. Above there is a good which, in a sense, bears more resemblance to evil than to this low form of good. This fact opens the way to a great deal of demagogy and many tedious paradoxes. Good which is deﬁned in the way in which one deﬁnes evil should be rejected. Evil does reject it. But the way it rejects it is evil. Is there a union of incompatible vices in beings given over to evil? I do not think so. Vices are subject to gravity and that is why there is no depth or transcendence in evil. We experience good only by doing it. We experience evil only by refusing to allow ourselves to do it, or, if we do it, by repenting of it. When we do evil we do not know it, because evil ﬂies from the light. Does evil, as we conceive it to be when we do not do it, exist? Does not the evil that we do seem to be something simple and natural which compels us? Is not evil analogous to illusion? When we are the victims of an illusion we do not feel it to be an illusion but a reality. It is the same perhaps with evil. Evil when we are in its power is not felt as evil but as a necessity, or even a duty. As soon as we do evil, the evil appears as a sort of duty. Most people have a sense of duty about doing certain things that are bad and others that are good. The same man feels it to be a duty to sell for the highest price he can and not to steal etc. Good for such people is on the level of evil, it is a good without light. The sensitivity of the innocent victim who suﬀers is like felt crime. True crime cannot be felt. The innocent victim who suﬀers knows the truth about his executioner, the executioner 71 72 gravity and grace does not know it. The evil which the innocent victim feels in himself is in his executioner, but he is not sensible of the fact. The innocent victim can only know the evil in the form of suﬀering. That which is not felt by the criminal is his own crime. That which is not felt by the innocent victim is his own innocence. It is the innocent victim who can feel hell. The sin which we have in us emerges from us and spreads outside ourselves setting up a contagion of sin. Thus, when we are in a temper, those around us grow angry. Or again, from superior to inferior: anger produces fear. But at the contact of a perfectly pure being there is a transmutation and the sin becomes suﬀering. Such is the function of the just servant of Isaiah, of the Lamb of God. Such is redemptive suﬀering. All the criminal violence of the Roman Empire ran up against Christ and in him it became pure suﬀering. Evil beings, on the other hand, transform simple suﬀering (sickness for example) into sin. It follows, perhaps, that redemptive suﬀering has to have a social origin. It has to be injustice, violence on the part of human beings. The false God changes suﬀering into violence. The true God changes violence into suﬀering. Expiatory suﬀering is the shock in return for the evil we have done. Redemptive suﬀering is the shadow of the pure good we desire. A hurtful act is the transference to others of the degradation which we bear in ourselves. That is why we are inclined to commit such acts as a way of deliverance. All crime is a transference of the evil in him who acts to him evil who undergoes the result of the action. This is true of unlawful love as well as murder. The apparatus of penal justice has been so contaminated with evil, after all the centuries during which it has, without any compensatory puriﬁcation, been in contact with evil-doers, that a condemnation is very often a transference of evil from the penal apparatus itself to the condemned man; and that is possible even when he is guilty and the punishment is not out of proportion. Hardened criminals are the only people to whom the penal apparatus can do no harm. It does terrible harm to the innocent. When there is a transference of evil, the evil is not diminished but increased in him from whom it proceeds. This is a phenomenon of multiplication. The same is true when the evil is transferred to things. Where, then, are we to put the evil? We have to transfer it from the impure part to the pure part of ourselves, thus changing it into pure suﬀering. The crime which is latent in us we must inﬂict on ourselves. In this way, however, it would not take us long to sully our own point of inward purity if we did not renew it by contact with an unchangeable purity placed beyond all possible attack. Patience consists in not transforming suﬀering into crime. That in itself is enough to transform crime into suﬀering. To transfer evil to what is exterior is to distort the relationship between things. That which is exact and ﬁxed, number, proportion, harmony, withstands this distortion. Whatever my state, whether vigorous or exhausted, in three miles there are three milestones. That is why number hurts when we are suﬀering: it interferes with the operation of transference. To ﬁx my attention on what is too rigid to be distorted by my interior modiﬁcations is to prepare to make possible within myself the apparition of something changeless and an access to the eternal. 73 74 gravity and grace We must accept the evil done to us as a remedy for that which we have done. It is not the suﬀering we inﬂict on ourselves but that which comes to us from outside which is the true remedy. Moreover, it has to be unjust. When we have sinned by injustice it is not enough to suﬀer what is just, we have to suﬀer injustice. Purity is absolutely invulnerable as purity, in the sense that no violence can make it less pure. It is, however, highly vulnerable in the sense that every attack of evil makes it suﬀer, that every sin which touches it turns in it to suﬀering. If someone does me an injury I must desire that this injury shall not degrade me. I must desire this out of love for him who inﬂicts it, in order that he may not really have done evil. The saints (those who are nearly saints) are more exposed than others to the devil because the real knowledge they have of their wretchedness makes the light almost intolerable. The sin against the Spirit consists of knowing a thing to be good and hating it because it is good. We experience the equivalent of it in the form of resistance every time we set our faces in the direction of good. For every contact with good leads to a knowledge of the distance between good and evil and the commencement of a painful eﬀort of assimilation. It is something which hurts and we are afraid. This fear is perhaps the sign of the reality of the contact. The corresponding sin cannot come about unless a lack of hope makes the consciousness of the distance intolerable and changes the pain into hatred. Hope is a remedy in this respect, but a better remedy is indiﬀerence to ourselves and happiness because the good is good although we are far from it and may even suppose that we are destined to remain separated from it for ever. evil Once an atom of pure good has entered the soul the most criminal weakness is inﬁnitely less dangerous than the very slightest treason, even though this should be conﬁned to a purely inward movement of thought lasting no more than an instant but to which we have given our consent. That is a participation in hell. So long as the soul has not tasted of pure goodness it is separated from hell as it is from paradise. It is only possible to choose hell through an attachment to salvation. He who does not desire the joy of God but is satisﬁed to know that there really is joy in God, falls but does not commit treason. When we love God through evil as such, it is really God whom we love. We have to love God through evil as such: to love God through the evil we hate, while hating this evil: to love God as the author of the evil which we are actually hating. Evil is to love, what mystery is to the intelligence. As mystery compels the virtue of faith to be supernatural, so does evil the virtue of charity. Moreover, to try to ﬁnd compensation or justiﬁcation for evil is just as harmful for charity as to try to expose the content of the mysteries on the plane of human intelligence. Speech of Ivan in the Karamazovs: ‘Even though this immense factory were to produce the most extraordinary marvels and were to cost only a single tear from a single child, I refuse.’ I am in complete agreement with this sentiment. No reason whatever which anyone could produce to compensate for a child’s tear would make me consent to that tear. Absolutely none which the mind can conceive. There is just one, however, but it is intelligible only to supernatural love: ‘God willed it’. And for 75 76 gravity and grace that reason I would consent to a world which was nothing but evil as readily as to a child’s tear. The death agony is the supreme dark night which is necessary even for the perfect if they are to attain to absolute purity, and for that reason it is better that it should be bitter. The unreality which takes the goodness from good; this is what constitutes evil. Evil is always the destruction of tangible things in which there is the real presence of good. Evil is carried out by those who have no knowledge of this real presence. In that sense it is true that no one is wicked voluntarily. The relations between forces give to absence the power to destroy presence. We cannot contemplate without terror the extent of the evil which man can do and endure. How could we believe it possible to ﬁnd a compensation for this evil, since because of it God suﬀered cruciﬁxion? Good and evil. Reality. That which gives more reality to beings and things is good, that which takes it from them is evil. The Romans did evil by robbing the Greek towns of their statues, because the towns, the temples and the life of the Greeks had less reality without the statues, and because the statues could not have as much reality in Rome as in Greece. The desperate, humble supplication of the Greeks to be allowed to keep some of their statues—a desperate attempt to make their own notion of value pass into the minds of others. Understood this, there is nothing base in their behaviour. But it was almost bound to be ineﬀectual. There is a duty to understand and weigh the system of other people’s values with our own, on the same balance—to forge the balance. To allow the imagination to dwell on what is evil implies a evil certain cowardice; we hope to enjoy, to know and to grow through what is unreal. Even to dwell in imagination on certain things as possible (quite a diﬀerent thing from clearly conceiving the possibility of them, which is essential to virtue) is to commit ourselves to them already. Curiosity is the cause of it. We have to forbid ourselves certain things (not the conception of them but the dwelling on them): we must not think about them. We believe that thought does not commit us in any way, but it alone commits us, and licence of thought includes all licence. Not to think about a thing—supreme faculty. Purity—negative virtue. If we have allowed our imagination to dwell on an evil thing, if we meet other men who make it objective through their words and actions and thus remove the social barrier, we are already nearly lost. And what is easier? There is no sharp division. When we see the ditch we are already over it. With good it is quite otherwise; the ditch is visible when it has still to be crossed, at the moment of the wrench and the rending. One does not fall into good. The word baseness (lowness) expresses this property of evil. Even when it is an accomplished fact evil keeps the character of unreality; this perhaps explains the simplicity of criminals; everything is simple in dreams. This simplicity corresponds to that of the highest virtue. Evil has to be puriﬁed—or life is not possible. God alone can do that. This is the idea of the Gita. It is also the idea of Moses, of Mahomet, of Hitlerism . . . But Jehovah, Allah, Hitler are earthly Gods. The puriﬁcation they bring about is imaginary. That which is essentially diﬀerent from evil is virtue accompanied by a dear perception of the possibility of evil and of evil 77 78 gravity and grace appearing as something good. The presence of illusions which we have abandoned but which are still present in the mind is perhaps the criterion of truth. We cannot have a horror of doing harm to others unless we have reached a point where others can no longer do harm to us (then we love others, to the furthest limit, like our past selves). The contemplation of human misery wrenches us in the direction of God, and it is only in others whom we love as ourselves that we can contemplate it. We can neither contemplate it in ourselves as such nor in others as such. The extreme aﬄiction which overtakes human beings does not create human misery, it merely reveals it. Sin and the glamour of force. Because the soul in its entirety has not been able to know and accept human misery, we think that there is a diﬀerence between human beings, and in this way we fall short of justice, either by making a diﬀerence between ourselves and others or by making a selection among others. This is because we do not know that human misery is a constant and irreducible quantity which is as great as it can be in each man, and that greatness comes from the one and only God, so that there is identity between one man and another in this respect. We are surprised that aﬄiction does not have an ennobling eﬀect. This is because when we think of the aﬄicted person it is the aﬄiction we have in mind. Whereas he himself does not think of his aﬄiction: he has his soul ﬁlled with no matter what paltry comfort he may have set his heart on. How could there be no evil in the world? The world has to be evil foreign to our desires. If this were so without it containing evil, our desires would then be entirely bad. That must not happen. There is every degree of distance between the creature and God. A distance where the love of God is impossible. Matter, plants, animals. Here, evil is so complete that it destroys itself: there is no longer any evil: mirror of divine innocence. We are at the point where love is just possible. It is a great privilege, since the love which unites is in proportion to the distance. God has created a world which is not the best possible, but which contains the whole range of good and evil. We are at the point where it is as bad as possible; for beyond is the stage where evil becomes innocence. 79 AFFLICTION Suﬀering: superiority of man over God. The Incarnation was necessary so that this superiority should not be scandalous. I should not love my suﬀering because it is useful. I should love it because it is. To accept what is bitter. The acceptance must not be reﬂected back on to the bitterness so as to diminish it, otherwise the acceptance will be proportionately diminished in force and purity, for the thing to be accepted is that which is bitter in so far as it is bitter; it is that and nothing else. We have to say like Ivan Karamazov that nothing can make up for a single tear from a single child, and yet to accept all tears and the nameless horrors which are beyond tears. We have to accept these things, not in so far as they bring compensations with them, but in themselves. We have to accept the fact that they exist simply because they do exist. affliction If there were no aﬄiction in this world we might think we were in paradise. Two conceptions of hell: the ordinary one (suﬀering without consolation); mine (false beatitude, mistakenly thinking oneself to be in paradise). Greater purity of physical suﬀering (Thibon). Hence, greater dignity of the people. We should seek neither to escape suﬀering nor to suﬀer less, but to remain untainted by suﬀering. The extreme greatness of Christianity lies in the fact that it does not seek a supernatural remedy for suﬀering but a supernatural use for it. We should make every eﬀort we can to avoid aﬄiction, so that the aﬄiction which we meet with may be perfectly pure and perfectly bitter. Joy is the overﬂowing consciousness of reality. But to suﬀer while preserving our consciousness of reality is better. To suﬀer without being submerged in the nightmare. May the suﬀering be in one sense purely exterior and in another purely interior. For this to be so it must be situated only in the feelings. Then it is exterior (as it is outside the spiritual part of the soul) and interior (as it is entirely concentrated on ourselves, without being reﬂected back on to the universe in order to impair it). Aﬄiction compels us to recognize as real what we do not think possible. 81 82 gravity and grace Aﬄiction. Time bears the thinking being in spite of himself towards that which he cannot bear and which will come all the same. ‘Let this cup pass from me.’ Each second which passes brings some being in the world nearer to something he cannot bear. There is a point in aﬄiction where we are no longer able to bear either that it should go on or that we should be delivered from it. Suﬀering is nothing, apart from the relationship between the past and the future, but what is more real for man than this relationship? It is reality itself. The future. We go on thinking it will come until the moment when we think it will never come. Two thoughts lighten aﬄiction a little. Either that it will stop almost immediately or that it will never stop. We can think of it as impossible or necessary, but we can never think that it simply is. That is unendurable. ‘It is not possible!’ What is not possible is to envisage a future where the aﬄiction will continue. The natural spring of thought towards the future is arrested. We are lacerated in our sense of time. ‘In a month, in a year, how shall we suﬀer?’ The being who can bear to think neither of the past nor the future is reduced to the state of matter. White Russians at Renault’s works. Thus one can learn to be obedient like matter, but no doubt they invented for themselves ready-made and illusive pasts and futures. The fragmentation of time for criminals and prostitutes; it is the same with slaves. This is then a characteristic of aﬄiction. Time does us violence; it is the only violence. ‘Another shall gird thee and lead thee whither thou wouldst not’; time leads us whither we do not wish to go. Were I condemned to death, I affliction should not be executed if, in the interval, time stood still. Whatever frightful thing may happen, can we desire that time should stop, that the stars should be stayed in their courses? Time’s violence rends the soul: by the rent eternity enters. All problems come back again to time. Extreme suﬀering: undirected time: the way to hell or to paradise. Perpetuity or eternity. It is not joy and sorrow which are opposed to each other, but the varieties within the one and the other. There are an infernal joy and pain, a healing joy and pain, a celestial joy and pain. By nature we ﬂy from suﬀering and seek pleasure. It is for this reason alone that joy serves as an image for good and pain for evil. Hence the imagery of paradise and hell. But as a matter of fact pleasure and pain are inseparable companions. Suﬀering, teaching and transformation. What is necessary is not that the initiated should learn something, but that a transformation should come about in them which makes them capable of receiving the teaching. Pathos means at the same time suﬀering (notably suﬀering unto death) and modiﬁcation notably transformation into an immortal being). Suﬀering and enjoyment as sources of knowledge. The serpent oﬀered knowledge to Adam and Eve. The Sirens oﬀered knowledge to Ulysses. These stories teach that the soul is lost through seeking knowledge in pleasure. Why? Pleasure is perhaps innocent on condition that we do not seek knowledge in it. It is permissible to seek that only in suﬀering. The inﬁnite which is in man is at the mercy of a little piece of 83 84 gravity and grace iron; such is the human condition; space and time are the cause of it. It is impossible to handle this piece of iron without suddenly reducing the inﬁnite which is in man to a point on the pointed part, a point on the handle, at the cost of a harrowing pain. The whole being is stricken on the instant; there is no place left for God, even in the case of Christ, where the thought of God is no more at least than that of privation. This stage has to be reached if there is to be incarnation. The whole being becomes privation of God: how can we go beyond? After that there is only the resurrection. To reach this stage the cold touch of naked iron is necessary. At the touch of the iron there must be a feeling of separation from God such as Christ experienced, otherwise it is another God. The martyrs did not feel that they were separated from God, but it was another God and it was perhaps better not to be a martyr. The God from whom the martyrs drew joy in torture or death is akin to the one who was oﬃcially adopted by the Empire and afterwards imposed by means of exterminations. To say that the world is not worth anything, that this life is of no value and to give evil as the proof is absurd, for if these things are worthless what does evil take from us? Thus the better we are able to conceive of the fullness of joy, the purer and more intense will be our suﬀering in aﬄiction and our compassion for others. What does suﬀering take from him who is without joy? And if we conceive the fullness of joy, suﬀering is still to joy what hunger is to food. It is necessary to have had a revelation of reality through joy in order to ﬁnd reality through suﬀering. Otherwise life is nothing but a more or less evil dream. We must attain to the knowledge of a still fuller reality in suﬀering which is a nothingness and a void. In the same way we have greatly to love life in order to love death still more. VIOLENCE Death is the most precious thing which has been given to man. That is why the supreme impiety is to make a bad use of it. To die amiss. To kill amiss. (But how can we escape at the same time both from suicide and murder?) After death, love. An analogous problem: neither wrong enjoyment nor wrong privation. War and Eros are the two sources of illusion and falsehood among men. Their mixture represents the very greatest impurity. We must strive to substitute more and more in this world eﬀective non-violence for violence. Non-violence is no good unless it is eﬀective. Hence the young man’s question to Gandhi about his sister. The answer should have been: use force unless you are such that you can defend her with as much chance of success without violence. Unless you possess a radiance of which the energy (that is to say the possible eﬀectiveness in the most material sense of the word) is equal to that contained in your muscles. 86 gravity and grace We should strive to become such that we are able to be non-violent. This depends also on the adversary. The cause of wars: there is in every man and in every group of men a feeling that they have a just and legitimate claim to be masters of the universe—to possess it. But this possession is not rightly understood because they do not know that each one has access to it (in so far as this is possible for man on this earth) through his own body. Alexander is to a peasant proprietor what Don Juan is to a happily married husband. War. To keep the love of life intact within us; never to inﬂict death without accepting it for ourselves. Supposing the life of X . . . were linked with our own so that the two deaths had to be simultaneous, should we still wish him to die? If with our whole body and soul we desire life and if nevertheless without lying, we can reply ‘yes’, then we have the right to kill. THE CROSS Whoever takes up the sword shall perish by the sword. And whoever does not take up the sword (or lets it go) shall perish on the cross. Christ healing the sick, raising the dead, etc.—that is the humble, human, almost low part of his mission. The supernatural part is the sweat of blood, the unsatisﬁed longing for human consolation, the supplication that he might be spared, the sense of being abandoned by God. The abandonment at the supreme moment of the cruciﬁxion, what an abyss of love on both sides! ‘My God, my God, why has thou forsaken me?’ There we have the real proof that Christianity is something divine. To be just it is necessary to be naked and dead—without 88 gravity and grace imagination. That is why the model of justice has to be naked and dead. The cross alone is not open to imaginary imitation. In order that the imitation of God should not be a mere matter of words, it is necessary that there should be a just man to imitate, but in order that we should be carried beyond the will it is necessary that we should not be able to choose to imitate him. One cannot choose the cross. One might choose no matter what degree of asceticism or heroism, but not the cross, that is to say penal suﬀering. Those who can only conceive of the cruciﬁxion under the aspect of an oﬀering do away with the salutary mystery and the salutary bitterness of it. To wish for martyrdom is far too little. The cross is inﬁnitely more than martyrdom. It is the most purely bitter suﬀering—penal suﬀering. This is the guarantee of its authenticity. The cross. The tree of sin was a real tree, the tree of life was a wooden beam. Something which does not give fruit, but only vertical movement. ‘The Son of Man must be lifted up and he will draw all men unto himself.’ We can kill the vital energy in ourselves while keeping only the vertical movement. Leaves and fruit are a waste of energy if our only wish is to rise. Adam and Eve sought for divinity in vital energy—a tree, fruit. But it is prepared for us on dead wood, geometrically squared, where a corpse is hanging. We must look for the secret of our kinship with God in our mortality. God wears himself out through the inﬁnite thickness of time and space in order to reach the soul and to captivate it. If it allows a pure and utter consent (though brief as a lightning ﬂash) to be torn from it, then God conquers that soul. And when it has become entirely his he abandons it. He leaves it completely the cross alone and it has in its turn, but gropingly, to cross the inﬁnite thickness of time and space in search of him whom it loves. It is thus that the soul, starting from the opposite end, makes the same journey that God made towards it. And that is the cross. God is cruciﬁed from the fact that ﬁnite beings, subject to necessity, to space and to time, think. I have to know that as a thinking, ﬁnite being I am God cruciﬁed. I have to be like God, but like God cruciﬁed. Like God almighty in so far as he is bound by necessity. Prometheus—the god cruciﬁed for having loved men too much. Hippolytus, the man punished for having been too pure and too much loved by the gods. It is the coming together of the human and the divine which calls forth punishment. We are what is furthest from God, situated at the extreme limit from which it is not absolutely impossible to come back to him. In our being, God is torn. We are the cruciﬁxion of God. The love of God for us is a passion. How could that which is good love that which is evil without suﬀering? And that which is evil suﬀers too in loving that which is good. The mutual love of God and man is suﬀering. In order that we should realize the distance between ourselves and God it was necessary that God should be a cruciﬁed slave. For we do not realize distance except in the downward direction. It is much easier to imagine ourselves in the place of God the Creator than in the place of Christ cruciﬁed. The dimensions of Christ’s charity are the same as the distance between God and the creature. 89 90 gravity and grace The function of mediation in itself implies a tearing asunder. That is why we cannot conceive of the descent of God towards men or the ascent of man towards God without a tearing asunder. We have to cross the inﬁnite thickness of time and space—and God has to do it ﬁrst, because he comes to us ﬁrst. Of the links between God and man, love is the greatest. It is as great as the distance to be crossed. So that the love may be as great as possible, the distance is as great as possible. That is why evil can extend to the extreme limit beyond which the very possibility of good disappears. Evil is permitted to touch this limit. It sometimes seems as though it overpassed it. This, in a sense, is exactly the opposite of what Leibniz thought. It is certainly more compatible with God’s greatness, for if he had made the best of all possible worlds, it would mean that he could not do very much. God crosses through the thickness of the world to come to us. The Passion is the existence of perfect justice without any admixture of appearance. Justice is essentially non-active. It must either be transcendent or suﬀering. The Passion is purely supernatural justice, absolutely stripped of all sensible help, even of the love of God in so far as it can be felt. Redemptive suﬀering is that which strips suﬀering naked and brings it in its purity right into existence. That saves existence. As God is present through the consecration of the Eucharist in what the senses perceive as a morsel of bread, so he is present the cross in extreme evil through redemptive suﬀering through the cross. From human misery to God. But not as a compensation or consolation. As a correlation. There are people for whom everything is salutary which brings God nearer to them. For me it is everything which keeps him at a distance. Between me and him there is the thickness of the universe—and that of the cross is added to it. Suﬀering is at the same time quite external with regard to innocence and quite essential to it. Blood on snow. Innocence and evil. Evil itself must be pure. It can only be pure in the form of the suﬀering of someone innocent. An innocent being who suﬀers sheds the light of salvation upon evil. Such a one is the visible image of the innocent God. That is why a God who loves man and a man who loves God have to suﬀer. Happy innocence. That also is something precious. But it is a precarious and fragile happiness, a happiness which depends on chance. The blossom of apple trees. Happiness is not bound up with innocence. To be innocent is to bear the weight of the entire universe. It is to throw away the counterweight. In emptying ourselves we expose ourselves to all the pressure of the surrounding universe. God gives himself to men either as powerful or as perfect—it is for them to choose. 91 BALANCE AND LEVER The cross as a balance, as a lever. A going down, the condition of a rising up. Heaven coming down to earth raises earth to heaven. A lever. We lower when we want to lift. In the same way ‘he who humbleth himself shall be exalted’. There are necessity and laws in the realm of grace likewise. Even hell has its laws (Goethe). So has heaven. A strict necessity which excludes all that is arbitrary or dependent on chance rules over mathematical phenomena. Although they are free, there is if possible even less arbitrariness and chance in spiritual matters. One—the smallest of the numbers. ‘The One that alone is wise.’ That is the inﬁnite. A number balance and lever which increases thinks that it is getting near to inﬁnity. It is receding from it. We must stoop in order to rise. If  is God, ∞ is the devil. It is human misery and not pleasure which contains the secret of the divine wisdom. All pleasure-seeking is the search for an artiﬁcial paradise, an intoxication, an enlargement. But it gives us nothing except the experience that it is vain. Only the contemplation of our limitations and our misery puts us on a higher plane. ‘Whosoever humbleth himself shall be exalted.’ The upward movement in us is vain (and less than vain) if it does not come from a downward movement. Statera facta corporis. It is the cruciﬁed body which is a true balance, the body reduced to its point in time and space. We must not judge. We must be like the Father in heaven who does not judge: by him beings judge themselves. We must let all beings come to us, and leave them to judge themselves. We must be a balance. Then we shall not be judged, having become an image of the true judge who does not judge. When the whole universe weighs upon us there is no other counterweight possible but God himself—the true God, for in this case false gods cannot do anything, not even under the name of the true one. Evil is inﬁnite in the sense of being indeﬁnite: matter, space, time. Nothing can overcome this kind of inﬁnity except the true inﬁnity. That is why on the balance of the cross a body which was frail and light but which was God, lifted up the whole world. ‘Give me a point of leverage and I will lift up the world.’ This point of leverage is the cross. There can be no other. It has to be at the intersection of the world and that which is not the world. The cross is this intersection. 93 THE IMPOSSIBLE Human life is impossible. But it is only aﬄiction which makes us feel this. The impossibility of good: ‘Good comes out of evil, evil out of good, and when will it all end?’ The good is impossible. But man always has enough imagination at his disposal to hide from himself in each particular case the impossibility of good (it is enough if for each event which does not crush us ourselves we can veil part of the evil and add a ﬁctitous good—and some people manage to do this even if they are crushed themselves). Man’s imagination at the same time prevents him from seeing ‘how much the essence of the necessary diﬀers from that of the good,’ and prevents him from allowing himself really to meet God who is none other than the good itself—the good which is found nowhere in this world. Desire is impossible: it destroys its object. Lovers cannot be the impossible one, nor can Narcissus be two. Don Juan, Narcissus. Because to desire something is impossible, we have to desire what is nothing. Our life is impossibility, absurdity. Everything we want contradicts the conditions or the consequences attached to it, every aﬃrmation we put forward involves a contradictory aﬃrmation, all our feelings are mixed up with their opposites. It is because we are a contradiction—being creatures—being God and inﬁnitely other than God. Contradiction alone is the proof that we are not everything. Contradiction is our wretchedness, and the sense of our wretchedness is the sense of reality. For we do not invent our wretchedness. It is true. That is why we have to value it. All the rest is imaginary. Impossibility is the door of the supernatural. We can but knock at it. It is someone else who opens. It is necessary to touch impossibility in order to come out of the dream world. There is no impossibility in dreams—only impotence. ‘Our Father, he who is in heaven.’ There is a sort of humour in that. He is your Father, but just try to go and look for him up there! We are quite as incapable of rising from the ground as an earth-worm. And how should he for his part come to us without descending? There is no way of imagining a contact between God and man which is not as unintelligible as the incarnation. The incarnation explodes this unintelligibility. It is the most concrete way of representing this impossible descent. Hence why should it not be the truth? The links that we cannot forge are evidence of the transcendent. 95 96 gravity and grace We are beings with the faculty of knowing, willing and loving, and as soon as we turn our attention towards the objects of knowledge, will and love, we receive evidence that there is not one which is not impossible. Falsehood alone can veil such evidence. Consciousness of this impossibility forces us to long continually to grasp what cannot be grasped in all that we desire, know and will. When something seems impossible to obtain despite every eﬀort, it is an indication of a limit which cannot be passed on that plane and of the necessity for a change of level—a break in the ceiling. To wear ourselves out in eﬀorts on the same level degrades us. It is better to accept the limit, to contemplate it and savour all its bitterness. Error as an incentive, a source of energy. I think I see a friend. I run towards him. When I come a little nearer I see that it is someone else towards whom I am running—a stranger. In the same way we confuse the relative with the absolute—created things with God. All particular incentives are errors. Only that energy which is not due to any incentive is good: obedience to God, which, since God is beyond all that we can imagine or conceive, means obedience to nothing. This is at the same time impossible and necessary—in other words it is supernatural. A beneﬁt (bienfait). A good action is such if in doing it we realise with our whole soul that such a thing as a beneﬁt is absolutely impossible. To do good. Whatever I do I know perfectly clearly that it is not good, for he who is not good cannot do good. And ‘God alone is good . . .’ On every occasion, whatever we do, we do evil, and an intolerable evil. the impossible We must ask that all the evil we do may fall solely and directly on ourselves. That is the cross. That action is good which we are able to accomplish while keeping our attention and intention totally directed towards pure and impossible goodness, without veiling from ourselves by any falsehood either the attraction or the impossibility of pure goodness. In this way virtue is entirely analogous to artistic inspiration. The beautiful poem is the one which is composed while the attention is kept directed towards inexpressible inspiration, in so far as it is inexpressible. 97 CONTRADICTION The contradictions the mind comes up against—these are the only realities: they are the criterion of the real. There is no contradiction in what is imaginary. Contradiction is the test of necessity. Contradiction experienced to the very depths of the being tears us heart and soul: it is the cross. When the attention has revealed the contradiction in something on which it has been ﬁxed, a kind of loosening takes place. By persevering in this course we attain detachment. The demonstrable correlation of opposites is an image of the transcendental correlation of contradictories. All true good carries with it conditions which are contradictory and as a consequence is impossible. He who keeps his attention really ﬁxed on this impossibility and acts will do what is good. contradiction In the same way all truth contains a contradiction. Contradiction is the point of the pyramid. The word good has not the same meaning when it is a term of the correlation good-evil as when it describes the very being of God. The existence of opposite virtues in the souls of the saints: the metaphor of climbing corresponds to this. If I am walking on the side of a mountain I can see ﬁrst a lake, then, after a few steps, a forest. I have to choose either the lake or the forest. If I want to see both lake and forest at once, I have to climb higher. Only the mountain does not exist. It is made of air. One cannot go up: it is necessary to be drawn. An experimental ontological proof. I have not the principle of rising in me. I cannot climb to heaven through the air. It is only by directing my thoughts towards something better than myself that I am drawn upwards by this something. If I am really raised up, this something is real. No imaginary perfection can draw me upwards even by the fraction of an inch. For an imaginary perfection is automatically at the same level as I who imagine it—neither higher nor lower. What is thus brought about by thought direction is in no way comparable to suggestion. If I say to myself every morning: ‘I am courageous, I am not afraid’, I may become courageous but with a courage which conforms to what, in my present imperfection, I imagine under that name, and accordingly my courage will not go beyond this imperfection. It can only be a modiﬁcation on the same plane, not a change of plane. Contradiction is the criterion. We cannot by suggestion obtain things which are incompatible. Only grace can do that. A sensitive person who by suggestion becomes courageous hardens himself; often he may even, by a sort of savage pleasure, 99 100 gravity and grace amputate his own sensitivity. Grace alone can give courage while leaving the sensitivity intact, or sensitivity while leaving the courage intact. Man’s great aﬄiction, which begins with infancy and accompanies him till death, is that looking and eating are two diﬀerent operations. Eternal beatitude is a state where to look is to eat. That which we look at here below is not real, it is a mere setting. That which we eat is destroyed, it is no longer real. Sin has brought this separation about in us. The natural virtues, if we give the word virtue its authentic meaning, that is to say if we exclude the social imitations of virtue, are only possible as permanent attributes for someone who has supernatural grace within him. Their duration is supernatural. Opposites and contradictories. What the relation of opposites can do in the approach to the natural being, the unifying grasp of contradictory ideas can do in the approach to God. A man inspired by God is a man who has ways of behaviour, thoughts and feelings which are bound together by a bond impossible to deﬁne. Pythagorean idea: the good is always deﬁned by the union of opposites. When we recommend the opposite of an evil we remain on the level of that evil. After we have put it to the test, we return to the evil. That is what the Gita calls ‘the aberration of opposites’. Marxist dialectic is based on a very degraded and completely warped view of this. A wrong union of contraries. The imperialism of the working class developed by Marxism. Latin proverbs concerning the inso- contradiction 101 lence of newly-freed slaves. Insolence and servility are aggravated by each other. Sincere anarchists, discerning, as through a mist, the principle of the union of opposites, thought that evil could be destroyed by giving power to the oppressed. An impossible dream. What then diﬀerentiates the right from the wrong union of opposites. Bad union of opposites (bad because fallacious) is that which is achieved on the same plane as the opposites. Thus the granting of domination to the oppressed. In this way we do not get free from the oppression-domination cycle. The right union of opposites is achieved on a higher plane. Thus the opposition between domination and oppression is smoothed out on the level of the law—which is balance. In the same way suﬀering (and this is its special function) separates the opposites which have been united in order to unite them again on a higher plane than that of their ﬁrst union. The pulsation of sorrow-joy. But, mathematically, joy always triumphs. Suﬀering is violence, joy is gentleness, but joy is the stronger. The union of contradictories involves a wrenching apart. It is impossible without extreme suﬀering. The correlation of contradictories is detachment. An attachment to a particular thing can only be destroyed by an attachment which is incompatible with it. That explains: ‘Love your enemies. . . . He who hateth not his father and mother . . .’ Either we have made the contraries submissive to us or we have submitted to the contraries. Simultaneous existence of incompatible things in the soul’s bearing; balance which leans both ways at once: that is 102 gravity and grace saintliness, the actual realization of the microcosm, the imitation of the order of the world. The simultaneous existence of opposite virtues in the soul—like pincers to catch hold of God. We have to ﬁnd out and formulate certain general laws relating to man’s condition, concerning which many profound observations throw light on particular cases. Thus: that which is in every way superior reproduces that which is in every way inferior, but transposed. Relationships of evil to strength and to being; and of good to weakness or nothingness. Yet at the same time evil is privation. We have to elucidate the way contradictories have of being true. Method of investigation: as soon as we have thought something, try to see in what way the contrary is true.1 Evil is the shadow of good. All real good, possessing solidity and thickness, projects evil. Only imaginary good does not project it. As all good is attached to evil, if we desire the good and do not wish to spread the corresponding evil round us we are obliged, since we cannot avoid this evil, to concentrate it on ourselves. Thus the desire for utterly pure good involves the acceptance of the last degree of aﬄiction for ourselves. If we desire nothing but good, we are opposing the law which links real good to evil as the object in the light is linked to its 1 This aphorism gives us the key to the apparent contradictions scattered throughout the work of Simone Weil: love of tradition and detachment from the past, God conceived of as the supreme reality and as nothingness, etc. These contradictory ideas are true on diﬀerent planes of existence and their opposition is smoothed out on the level of supernatural love. Reason discerns the two ends of the chain but the centre which unites them is only accessible to undemonstrable intuition. [Editor’s note.] contradiction 103 shadow, and, being opposed to one of the world’s universal laws, it is inevitable that we should fall into aﬄiction. The mystery of the cross of Christ lies in a contradiction, for it is both a free-will oﬀering and a punishment which he endured in spite of himself. If we only saw in it an oﬀering, we might wish for a like fate. But we are unable to wish for a punishment endured in spite of ourselves. THE DISTANCE BETWEEN THE NECESSARY AND THE GOOD1 Necessity is God’s veil. God has committed all phenomena without exception to the mechanism of the world.2 As there is in God the analogy of every human virtue, so there is obedience. This is the free play he allows necessity in this world. 1 Cf. Plato, Republic, Book VI. [Editor’s note.] It is signiﬁcant to notice that Simone Weil extends the determinism of Descartes and Spinoza to all natural phenomena, including the facts of psychology. Gravity for her is only held in check by grace. She thus overlooks the margin of indetermination and spontaneity which God has left in nature and which allows for the introduction of liberty and miracles in the world. It remains none the less true that in fact gravity is practically all-powerﬁtl: Saint Thomas recognizes that most human actions are prompted by the blind appetite of the senses and subject to the determination of the stars. [Editor’s note.] 2 the distance between the necessary and the good 105 Necessity—an image by which the mind can conceive of the indiﬀerence, the impartiality of God. Thus the ordinary notion of miracles is a kind of impiety (a miracle being thought of as something which has no secondary cause but only a ﬁrst cause). The distance between the necessary and the good is the distance between the creature and the creator. The distance between the necessary and the good: this is a subject for endless contemplation. It was the great discovery of Greece. No doubt the fall of Troy taught it them. Every attempt to justify evil by anything other than the fact that that which is is, is an oﬀence against this truth. We aspire only to get rid of the intolerable burden of the good-evil cycle—a burden assumed by Adam and Eve. In order to do that it is necessary either to confuse ‘the essence of the necessary with that of the good’ or to depart from this world. Evil can only be puriﬁed by God or by the Social Beast. Purity puriﬁes evil—so does force in quite another way. In the case of one who is able to do all things, all things are permitted. He who serves an all-powerful master can do all things through him. Force delivers us from the good-evil cycle. It delivers him who exercises it and even him also who submits to it. A master has every licence, so has a slave. The sword aﬀords deliverance (whether through its handle or its point) from the intolerable weight of our obligation. Grace also delivers us from the burden but we only go towards it through obligation. We only escape limitation by rising up towards unity or going down towards the limitless. Limitation is the evidence that God loves us. 106 gravity and grace The idea that the end of the world was near, coloured the outlook of the early Christians. This belief produced in them a ‘forgetfulness of the immense distance which divides the necessary from the good.’ The absence of God is the most marvellous testimony of perfect love, and that is why pure necessity, necessity which is manifestly diﬀerent from good, is so beautiful. The limitless is the test of the one: time, of eternity: the possible, of necessity: variety, of the unvarying. The value of a system of knowledge, a work of art, a moral code or a soul is measured by the degree of its resistance to this test. CHANCE The beings I love are creatures. They were born by chance. My meeting with them was also by chance. They will die. What they think, do and say is limited and is a mixture of good and evil. I have to know this with all my soul and not love them the less. I have to imitate God who inﬁnitely loves ﬁnite things in that they are ﬁnite things. We want everything which has a value to be eternal. Now everything which has a value is the product of a meeting, lasts throughout this meeting and ceases when those things which met are separated. That is the central idea of Buddhism (the thought of Heraclitus). It leads straight to God. Meditation on chance which led to the meeting of my father and mother is even more salutary than meditation on death. Is there a single thing in me of which the origin is not to be 108 gravity and grace found in that meeting? Only God. And yet again, my thought of God had its origin in that meeting. Stars and blossoming fruit-trees: utter permanence and extreme fragility give an equal sense of eternity. The theories about progress and the ‘genius which always pierces through’, arise from the fact that it is intolerable to suppose that what is most precious in the world should be given over to chance. It is because it is intolerable that it ought to be contemplated. Creation is this very thing. The only good which is not subject to chance is that which is outside the world. The vulnerability of precious things is beautiful because vulnerability is a mark of existence. The destruction of Troy. The fall of the petals from fruit trees in blossom. To know that what is most precious is not rooted in existence—that is beautiful. Why? It projects the soul beyond time. The woman who wishes for a child white as snow and red as blood gets it, but she dies and the child is given over to a stepmother. HE WHOM WE MUST LOVE IS ABSENT God can only be present in creation under the form of absence. Evil is the innocence of God. We have to place God at an inﬁnite distance in order to conceive of him as innocent of evil; reciprocally, evil implies that we have to place God at an inﬁnite distance. This world, in so far as it is completely empty of God, is God himself. Necessity, in so far as it is absolutely other than the good, is the good itself. That is why all consolation in aﬄiction separates us from love and from truth. That is the mystery of mysteries. When we touch it we are safe. ‘In the desert of the East. . . .’ We have to be in a desert. For he whom we must love is absent. 110 gravity and grace He who puts his life into his faith in God can loose his faith. But he who puts his life in God himself will never lose it. To put our life into that which we cannot touch in any way. . . . It is impossible. It is a death. That is what is required. Nothing which exists is absolutely worthy of love. We must therefore love that which does not exist. This non-existent object of love is not a ﬁction, however, for our ﬁctions cannot be any more worthy of love than we are ourselves, and we are not worthy of it. Consent to the good—not to any good which can be grasped or represented, but unconditional consent to the absolute good. When we consent to something which we represent to ourselves as the good, we consent to a mixture of good and evil, and this consent produces good and evil: the proportion of good and evil in us does not change. On the other hand the unconditional consent to that good which we are not able and never will be able to represent to ourselves—such consent is pure good and produces only good, moreover, it is enough that it should continue for the whole soul to be nothing but good in the end. Faith (when it is a question of a supernatural interpretation of the natural) is a conjecture by analogy based on supernatural experience. Thus those who have the privilege of mystical contemplation, having experienced the mercy of God, suppose that, God being mercy, the created world is a work of mercy. But as for obtaining evidence of this mercy directly from nature, it would be necessary to become blind, deaf and without pity in order to believe such a thing possible. Thus the Jews and Moslems, who want to ﬁnd in nature the proofs of divine mercy, are pitiless. And often the Christians are as well. That is why mysticism is the only source of virtue for humanity. Because when men do not believe that there is inﬁnite mercy he whom we must love is absent 111 behind the curtain of the world, or when they think that this mercy is in front of the curtain, they become cruel. There are four evidences of divine mercy here below: the favours of God to beings capable of contemplation (these states exist and form part of their experience as creatures); the radiance of these beings and their compassion, which is the divine compassion in them; the beauty of the world. The fourth evidence is the complete absence of mercy here below.1 Incarnation. God is weak because he is impartial. He sends sunshine and rain to good and evil alike. This indiﬀerence of the Father and the weakness of Christ correspond. Absence of God. The kingdom of heaven is like a grain of mustard seed. . . . God changes nothing whatsoever. Christ was killed out of anger because he was only God. If I thought that God sent me suﬀering by an act of his will and for my good, I should think that I was something, and I should miss the chief use of suﬀering which is to teach me that I am nothing. It is therefore essential to avoid all such thoughts, but it is necessary to love God through the suﬀering. I must love being nothing. How horrible it would be if I were something! I must love my nothingness, love being a nothingness. I must love with that part of the soul which is on the other side of the curtain, for the part of the soul which is perceptible to consciousness cannot love nothingness. It has a horror of it. Though it may think it loves nothingness, what it really loves is something other than nothingness. 1 It is precisely by this antithesis, this rending of our souls between the eﬀects of grace within us and the beauty of the world around us, on the one hand, and the implacable necessity which rules the universe on the other, that we discern God as both present to man and as absolutely beyond all human measurement. 112 gravity and grace God sends aﬄiction without distinction to the wicked and to the good, just as he sends the rain and the sunlight. He did not reserve the cross for Christ. He enters into contact with a human individual as such only through purely spiritual grace which responds to the gaze turned towards him, that is to say to the exact extent to which the individual ceases to be an individual. No event is a favour on the part of God—only grace is that. Communion is good for the good and bad for the wicked. Hence, damned souls are in paradise, but for them paradise is hell. The cry of suﬀering: ‘Why?’ This rings throughout the Iliad. To explain suﬀering is to console it; therefore it must not be explained. Herein lies the pre-eminent value of the suﬀering of those who are innocent. It bears a resemblance to the acceptance of the evil in creation by God who is innocent. The irreducible character of suﬀering which makes it impossible for us not to have a horror of it at the moment when we are undergoing it is destined to bring the will to a standstill, just as absurdity brings the intelligence to a standstill, and absence love, so that man, having come to the end of his human faculties, may stretch out his arms, stop, look up and wait. ‘He will laugh at the trials of the innocent.’ Silence of God. The noises here below imitate this silence. They mean nothing. It is when from the innermost depths of our being we need a sound which does mean something—when we cry out for an answer and it is not given us—it is then that we touch the silence of God. As a rule our imagination puts words into the sounds in the same way as we idly play at making out shapes in wreaths of he whom we must love is absent 113 smoke; but when we are too exhausted, when we no longer have the courage to play, then we must have real words. We cry out for them. The cry tears our very entrails. All we get is silence. After having gone through that, some begin to talk to themselves like madmen. Whatever they may do afterwards, we must have nothing but pity for them. The others, and they are not numerous, give their whole heart to silence. ATHEISM AS A PURIFICATION A case of contradictories which are true. God exists: God does not exist. Where is the problem? I am quite sure that there is a God in the sense that I am quite sure my love is not illusory. I am quite sure that there is not a God in the sense that I am quite sure nothing real can be anything like what I am able to conceive when I pronounce this word. But that which I cannot conceive is not an illusion. There are two atheisms of which one is a puriﬁcation of the notion of God. Perhaps every evil thing has a second aspect—a puriﬁcation in the course of progress towards the good—and a third which is the higher good. We have to distinguish carefully between these three aspects because it is very dangerous for thought and for the eﬀective conduct of life to confuse them. atheism as a purification 115 Of two men who have no experience of God, he who denies him is perhaps nearer to him than the other. The false God who is like the true one in everything, except that we cannot touch him, prevents us from ever coming to the true one. We have to believe in a God who is like the true God in everything, except that he does not exist, since we have not reached the point where God exists. The errors of our time come from Christianity without the supernatural. Secularization is the cause—and primarily humanism. Religion in so far as it is a source of consolation is a hindrance to true faith: in this sense atheism is a puriﬁcation. I have to be atheistic with the part of myself which is not made for God. Among those men in whom the supernatural part has not been awakened, the atheists are right and the believers wrong. A man whose whole family had died under torture, and who had himself been tortured for a long time in a concentration camp; or a sixteenth-century Indian, the sole survivor after the total extermination of his people. Such men if they had previously believed in the mercy of God would either believe in it no longer, or else they would conceive of it quite diﬀerently from before. I have not been through such things. I know, however, that they exist; so what is the diﬀerence? I must move towards an abiding conception of the divine mercy, a conception which does not change whatever event destiny may send upon me and which can be communicated to no matter what human being. ATTENTION AND WILL We do not have to understand new things, but by dint of patience, eﬀort and method to come to understand with our whole self the truths which are evident. Stages of belief. The most commonplace truth when it ﬂoods the whole soul, is like a revelation. We have to try to cure our faults by attention and not by will. The will only controls a few movements of a few muscles, and these movements are associated with the idea of the change of position of near-by objects. I can will to put my hand ﬂat on the table. If inner purity, inspiration or truth of thought were necessarily associated with attitudes of this kind, they might be the object of will. As this is not the case, we can only beg for them. To beg for them is to believe that we have a Father in heaven. Or should we cease to desire them? What could be worse? Inner supplication is the only reasonable way, for it avoids stiﬀening muscles which have nothing to do with the matter. What could attention and will 117 be more stupid than to tighten up our muscles and set our jaws about virtue, or poetry, or the solution of a problem. Attention is something quite diﬀerent. Pride is a tightening up of this kind. There is a lack of grace (we can give the word its double meaning here) in the proud man. It is the result of a mistake. Attention, taken to its highest degree, is the same thing as prayer. It presupposes faith and love. Absolutely unmixed attention is prayer. If we turn our mind towards the good, it is impossible that little by little the whole soul will not be attracted thereto in spite of itself. Extreme attention is what constitutes the creative faculty in man and the only extreme attention is religious. The amount of creative genius in any period is strictly in proportion to the amount of extreme attention and thus of authentic religion at that period. The wrong way of seeking. The attention ﬁxed on a problem. Another phenomenon due to horror of the void. We do not want to have lost our labour. The heat of the chase. We must not want to ﬁnd: as in the case of an excessive devotion, we become dependent on the object of our eﬀorts. We need an outward reward which chance sometimes provides and which we are ready to accept at the price of a deformation of the truth. It is only eﬀort without desire (not attached to an object) which infallibly contains a reward. To draw back before the object we are pursuing. Only an indirect method is eﬀective. We do nothing if we have not ﬁrst drawn back. 118 gravity and grace By pulling at the bunch, we make all the grapes fall to the ground. There are some kinds of eﬀort which defeat their own object (example: the soured disposition of certain pious females, false asceticism, certain sorts of self-devotion, etc.). Others are always useful, even if they do not meet with success. How are we to distinguish between them? Perhaps in this way: some eﬀorts are always accompanied by the (false) negation of our inner wretchedness; with others the attention is continually concentrated on the distance there is between what we are and what we love. Love is the teacher of gods and men, for no one learns without desiring to learn. Truth is sought not because it is truth but because it is good. Attention is bound up with desire. Not with the will but with desire—or more exactly, consent. We liberate energy in ourselves, but it constantly reattaches itself. How are we to liberate it entirely? We have to desire that it should be done in us—to desire it truly—simply to desire it, not to try to accomplish it. For every attempt in that direction is vain and has to be dearly paid for. In such a work all that I call ‘I’ has to be passive. Attention alone—that attention which is so full that the ‘I’ disappears—is required of me. I have to deprive all that I call ‘I’ of the light of my attention and turn it on to that which cannot be conceived. The capacity to drive a thought away once and for all is the gateway to eternity. The inﬁnite in an instant. As regards temptations, we must follow the example of the truly chaste woman who, when the seducer speaks to her, makes no answer and pretends not to hear him. attention and will 119 We should be indiﬀerent to good and evil but, when we are indiﬀerent, that is to say when we project the light of our attention equally on both, the good gains the day. This phenomenon comes about automatically. There lies the essential grace. And it is the deﬁnition, the criterion of good. A divine inspiration operates infallibly, irresistibly, if we do not turn away our attention, if we do not refuse it. There is not a choice to be made in its favour, it is enough not to refuse to recognize that it exists. The attention turned with love towards God (or in a lesser degree, towards anything which is truly beautiful) makes certain things impossible for us. Such is the non-acting action of prayer in the soul. There are ways of behaviour which would veil such attention should they be indulged in and which, reciprocally, this attention puts out of the question. As soon as we have a point of eternity in the soul, we have nothing more to do but to take care of it, for it will grow of itself like a seed. It is necessary to surround it with an armed guard, waiting in stillness, and to nourish it with the contemplation of numbers, of ﬁxed and exact relationships. We nourish the changeless which is in the soul by the contemplation of that which is unchanging in the body. Writing is like giving birth: we cannot help making the supreme eﬀort. But we also act in like fashion. I need have no fear of not making the supreme eﬀort—provided only that I am honest with myself and that I pay attention. The poet produces the beautiful by ﬁxing his attention on something real. It is the same with the act of love. To know that this man who is hungry and thirsty really exists as much as I do— that is enough, the rest follows of itself. 120 gravity and grace The authentic and pure values—truth, beauty and goodness— in the activity of a human being are the result of one and the same act, a certain application of the full attention to the object. Teaching should have no aim but to prepare, by training the attention, for the possibility of such an act. All the other advantages of instruction are without interest. Studies and faith. Prayer being only attention in its pure form and studies being a form of gymnastics of the attention, each school exercise should be a refraction of spiritual life. There must be method in it. A certain way of doing a Latin prose, a certain way of tackling a problem in geometry (and not just any way) make up a system of gymnastics of the attention calculated to give it a greater aptitude for prayer. Method for understanding images, symbols, etc. Not to try to interpret them, but to look at them till the light suddenly dawns. Generally speaking, a method for the exercise of the intelligence, which consists of looking. Application of this rule for the discrimination between the real and the illusory. In our sense perceptions, if we are not sure of what we see we change our position while looking, and what is real becomes evident. In the inner life, time takes the place of space. With time we are altered, and, if as we change we keep our gaze directed towards the same thing, in the end illusions are scattered and the real becomes visible. This is on condition that the attention be a looking and not an attachment. When a struggle goes on between the will attached to some obligation and a bad desire, there is a wearing away of the energy attached to good. We have to endure the biting of the desire passively, as we do a suﬀering which brings home to us our wretchedness, and we have to keep our attention turned attention and will 121 towards the good. Then the quality of our energy is raised to a higher degree. We must steal away the energy from our desires by taking away from them their temporal orientation. Our desires are inﬁnite in their pretensions but limited by the energy from which they proceed. That is why with the help of grace we can become their master and ﬁnally destroy them by attrition. As soon as this has been clearly understood, we have virtually conquered them, if we keep our attention in contact with this truth. Video meliora . . . In such states, it seems as though we were thinking of the good, and in a sense we are doing so, but we are not thinking of its possibility. It is incontestable that the void which we grasp with the pincers of contradiction is from on high, for we grasp it the better the more we sharpen our natural faculties of intelligence, will and love. The void which is from below is that into which we fall when we allow our natural faculties to become atrophied. Experience of the transcendent: this seems contradictory, and yet the transcendent can be known only through contact since our faculties are unable to invent it. Solitude. Where does its value lie? For in solitude we are in the presence of mere matter (even the sky, the stars, the moon, trees in blossom), things of less value (perhaps) than a human spirit. Its value lies in the greater possibility of attention. If we could be attentive to the same degree in the presence of a human being . . . We can only know one thing about God—that he is what we are 122 gravity and grace not. Our wretchedness alone is an image of this. The more we contemplate it, the more we contemplate him. Sin is nothing else but the failure to recognize human wretchedness. It is unconscious wretchedness and for that very reason guilty wretchedness. The story of Christ is the experimental proof that human wretchedness is irreducible, that it is as great in the absolutely sinless man as in the sinner. But in him who is without sin it is enlightened . . . The recognition of human wretchedness is diﬃcult for whoever is rich and powerful because he is almost invincibly led to believe that he is something. It is equally diﬃcult for the man in miserable circumstances because he is almost invincibly led to believe that the rich and powerful man is something. It is not the fault which constitutes mortal sin, but the degree of light in the soul when the fault, whatever it may be, is accomplished. Purity is the power to contemplate deﬁlement. Extreme purity can contemplate both the pure and the impure; impurity can do neither: the pure frightens it, the impure absorbs it. It has to have a mixture. TRAINING We have to accomplish the possible in order to touch the impossible. The correct exercise (according to our duty) of the natural faculties of will, love and knowledge is, in relation to spiritual realities, exactly what the movement of the body is in relation to the perception of tangible objects. A paralyzed man lacks this perception. The fulﬁlment of our strictly human duty is of the same order as correctness in the work of drafting, translating, calculating, etc. To be careless about this correctness shows a lack of respect for the object. The same thing applies to neglect of duty. Those things which have to do with inspiration are the only ones which are the better for delay. Those which have to do with natural duty and the will cannot allow of delay. Precepts are not given for the sake of being practised, but practice is prescribed in order that precepts may be understood. They 124 gravity and grace are scales. One does not play Bach without having done scales. But neither does one play a scale merely for the sake of the scale. Training. Every time we catch ourselves involuntarily indulging in a proud thought, we must for a few seconds turn the full gaze of our attention upon the memory of some humiliation in our past life, choosing the most bitter, the most intolerable we can think of. We must not try to change within ourselves or to eﬀace desires and aversions, pleasures and sorrows. We must submit to them passively, just as we do to the impressions we receive from colours, according no greater credit to them than in the latter case. If my window is red I cannot, though I should reason day and night for a whole year, see my room as anything but pink. I know, moreover, that it is necessary, just and right that I should see it thus. At the same time, as far as information about my room goes, I only accord to the pink colour a credit limited by my knowledge of its relation to the window. I must accept in this way and no other the desires and aversions, pleasures and sorrows of every kind which I ﬁnd within me. On the other hand, as we have also a principle of violence in us—that is to say the will—we must also, in a limited measure, but to the full extent of that measure, use this violent principle in a violent way; we must compel ourselves by violence to act as though we had not a certain desire or aversion, without trying to persuade our sensibility—compelling it to obey. This causes it to revolt and we have to endure this revolt passively, taste of it, savour it, accept it as something outside ourselves, as the pink colour of the room with the red window. Each time that we do violence to ourselves in this spirit we make an advance, slight or great but real, in the work of training the animal within us. Of course if this violence we do ourselves is really to be of use training 125 in our training it must only be a means. When a man trains a dog to perform tricks he does not beat it for the sake of beating it, but in order to train it, and with this in view he only hits it when it fails to carry out a trick. If he beats it without any method he ends by making it unﬁt for any training, and that is what the wrong sort of asceticism does. Violence against ourselves is only permissible when it is based on reason (with a view to carrying out what we clearly consider to be our duty)—or when it is enjoined on us through an irresistible impulsion on the part of grace (but then the violence does not come from ourselves). The source of my diﬃculties lies in the fact that, through exhaustion and an absence of vital energy, I am below the level of normal activity. And if something takes me and raises me up I am lifted above it. When such moments come it would seem to me a calamity to waste them in ordinary activities. At other times, I should have to do violence to myself with a violence which I cannot succeed in mustering. I could consent to the anomaly of behaviour resulting from this; but I know, or I believe I know, that I should not do so. It involves crimes of omission towards others. And as for myself, it imprisons me. What method is there then? ὰν θελ δ νασαι µ καθαρσαι1 I must practise transforming the sense of eﬀort into a passive sense of suﬀering. Whatever I may have to bear, when God sends me suﬀering, I am inescapably forced to suﬀer all that there is to suﬀer. Why, when it comes to duty, should I not in like manner do all that there is to be done? 1 ‘If thou wilt thou canst make me clean’ (Gospel text). 126 gravity and grace Mountains, rocks, fall upon us and hide us far from the wrath of the Lamb. At the present moment I deserve this wrath. I must not forget that according to Saint John of the Cross the inspirations which turn us from the accomplishment of easy and humble obligations come from the side of evil. Duty is given us in order to kill the self—and I allow so precious an instrument to grow rusty. We must do our duty at the prescribed time in order to believe in the reality of the external world. We must believe in the reality of time. Otherwise we are in a dream. It is years since I recognized this defect in myself and recognized its importance, and all this time I have done nothing to get rid of it. What excuse can I ﬁnd? Has it not been growing in me since I was ten years old? But however great it may be, it is limited. That is enough. If it is great enough to take from me the possibility of wiping it out during this life and so attaining to the state of perfection, that must be accepted just as it is, with an acceptance that is full of love. It is enough that I know that it exists, that it is evil and that it is ﬁnite. But to know each of these three things eﬀectively and to know them all three together implies the beginning and the uninterrupted continuation of the process of wiping out. If this process does not begin to show itself, it is a sign that I do not know in truth the very thing that I am writing. The necessary energy dwells in me, since I live by means of it. I must draw it relentlessly out of myself, even though I should die in so doing. Uninterrupted interior prayer is the only perfect criterion of good and evil. Everything which does not interrupt it is permitted, everything which interrupts it is forbidden. It is impossible to do harm to others when we act in a state of prayer—on condition that it is true prayer. But before reaching that stage, we training 127 must have worn down our own will against the observance of rules. Hope is the knowledge that the evil we bear within us is ﬁnite, that the slightest turning of the will towards good, though it should last but an instant, destroys a little of it, and that, in the spiritual realm, everything good infallibly produces good. Those who do not know this are doomed to the torture of the Danaïds. Good infallibly produces good, and evil evil, in the purely spiritual realm. On the other hand, in the natural realm, that of psychology included, good and evil reciprocally produce each other. Accordingly we cannot have security until we have reached the spiritual realm—precisely the realm where we can obtain nothing by our own eﬀorts, where we must wait for everything to come to us from outside. INTELLIGENCE AND GRACE We know by means of our intelligence that what the intelligence does not comprehend is more real than what it does comprehend. Faith is experience that intelligence is enlightened by love. Only, intelligence has to recognize by the methods proper to it, that is to say by veriﬁcation and demonstration, the preeminence of love. It must not yield unless it knows why, and it must know this quite precisely and clearly. Otherwise its submission is a mistake and that to which it submits itself is something other than supernatural love. For example it may be social inﬂuence. In the intellectual order, the virtue of humility is nothing more nor less than the power of attention. The wrong humility leads us to believe that we are nothing in so intelligence and grace 129 far as we are ourselves—in so far as we are certain particular human beings. True humility is the knowledge that we are nothing in so far as we are human beings as such, and, more generally, in so far as we are creatures. The intelligence plays a great part in this. We have to form a conception of the universal. When we listen to Bach or to a Gregorian melody, all the faculties of the soul become tense and silent in order to apprehend this thing of perfect beauty—each after its own fashion—the intelligence among the rest. It ﬁnds nothing in this thing it hears to aﬃrm or deny, but it feeds upon it. Should not faith be an adherence of this kind? The mysteries of faith are degraded if they are made into an object of aﬃrmation and negation, when in reality they should be an object of contemplation. The privileged rôle of the intelligence in real love comes from the fact that it is inherent in the nature of intelligence to become obliterated through the very fact that it is exercised. I can make eﬀorts to discover truths, but when I have them before me they exist and I do not count. There is nothing nearer to true humility than the intelligence. It is impossible to be proud of our intelligence at the moment when we are really exercising it. Moreover, when we do exercise it we are not attached to it, for we know that even if we became an idiot the following instant and remained so for the rest of our life, the truth would continue unchanged. The mysteries of the Catholic faith are not intended to be believed by all the parts of the soul. The presence of Christ in the host is not a fact of the same kind as the presence of Paul’s soul in Paul’s body (actually both are completely incomprehensible, 130 gravity and grace but not in the same way). The Eucharist should not then be an object of belief for the part of me which apprehends facts. That is where Protestantism is true. But this presence of Christ in the host is not a symbol, for a symbol is the combination of an abstraction and an image, it is something which human intelligence can represent to itself, it is not supernatural. There the Catholics are right, not the Protestants. Only with that part of us which is made for the supernatural should we adhere to these mysteries. The rôle of the intelligence—that part of us which aﬃrms and denies and formulates opinions—is merely to submit. All that I conceive of as true is less true than those things of which I cannot conceive the truth, but which I love. Saint John of the Cross calls faith a night. With those who have had a Christian education, the lower parts of the soul become attached to these mysteries when they have no right to do so. That is why such people need a puriﬁcation of which Saint John of the Cross describes the stages. Atheism and incredulity constitute an equivalent of this puriﬁcation. The desire to discover something new prevents people from allowing their thoughts to dwell on the transcendent, undemonstrable meaning of what has already been discovered. My total lack of talent which makes such a desire out of the question for me is a great favour I have received. The recognized and accepted lack of intellectual gifts compels the disinterested use of the intelligence. The object of our search should not be the supernatural, but the world. The supernatural is light itself: if we make an object of it we lower it. The world is a text with several meanings, and we pass from one meaning to another by a process of work. It must be work in intelligence and grace 131 which the body constantly bears a part, as, for example, when we learn the alphabet of a foreign language: this alphabet has to enter into our hand by dint of forming the letters. If this condition is not fulﬁlled, every change in our way of thinking is illusory. We have not to choose between opinions. We have to welcome them all but arrange them vertically, placing them on suitable levels. Thus: chance, destiny, Providence. Intelligence can never penetrate the mystery, but it, and it alone, can judge of the suitability of the words which express it. For this task it needs to be keener, more discerning, more precise, more exact and more exacting than for any other. The Greeks believed that only truth was suitable for divine things—not error nor approximations. The divine character of anything made them more exacting with regard to accuracy. (We do precisely the opposite, warped as we are by the habit of propaganda.) It was because they saw geometry as a divine revelation that they invented a rigorous system of demonstration . . . In all that has to do with the relations between man and the supernatural we have to seek for a more than mathematical precision; this should be more exact than science.1 We must suppose the rational in the Cartesian sense, that is to say 1 Here again is one of those contradictions which can only be resolved in the realm of the inexpressible: the mystic life, which only arises from the divine arbitrariness, is nevertheless subject to the most severe rules. Saint John of the Cross was able to give a geometric plan of the journey of the soul towards God. [Editor’s note.] 132 gravity and grace mechanical rule or necessity in its humanly demonstrable form, to be everywhere it is possible to suppose it, in order to bring to light that which lies outside its range. The use of reason makes things transparent to the mind. We do not, however, see what is transparent. We see that which is opaque through the transparent—the opaque which was hidden when the transparent was not transparent. We see either the dust on the window or the view beyond the window, but never the window itself. Cleaning oﬀ the dust only serves to make the view visible. The reason should be employed only to bring us to the true mysteries, the true undemonstrables, which are reality. The uncomprehended hides the incomprehensible and should on this account be eliminated. Science, today, will either have to seek a source of inspiration higher than itself or perish. Science only oﬀers three kinds of interest: (1) Technical applications, (2) A game of chess, (3) A road to God. (Attractions are added to the game of chess in the shape of competitions, prizes and medals.) Pythagoras. Only the mystical conception of geometry could supply the degree of attention necessary for the beginning of such a science. Is it not recognized, moreover, that astronomy issues from astrology and chemistry from alchemy? But we interpret this ﬁliation as an advance, whereas there is a degradation of the attention in it. Transcendental astrology and alchemy are the contemplation of eternal truths in the symbols oﬀered by the stars and the combinations of substances. Astronomy and chemistry are degradations of them. When astrology and alchemy become forms of magic they are still lower degradations of them. Attention only reaches its true dimensions when it is religious. intelligence and grace 133 Galileo. Having as its principle unlimited straight movement and no longer circular movement, modern science could no longer be a bridge towards God. The philosophical cleansing of the Catholic religion has never been done. In order to do it it would be necessary to be inside and outside. READINGS1 Others. To see each human being (an image of oneself) as a prison in which a prisoner dwells, surrounded by the whole universe. Electra, daughter of a powerful father, yet reduced to slavery, hoping only in her brother, sees a young man who tells her of the death of this brother—and at the moment when her distress is utterly complete it is revealed that this young man himself is her brother. ‘She, supposing him to be the gardener, . . . We must recognize our brother in a stranger, and God in the universe. Justice. To be ever ready to admit that another person is some1 With Simone Weil this word means: emotional interpretation, the concrete judgment of value. For instance, I see a man climbing over a wall: instinctively, and perhaps wrongly; I ‘read’ in him a robber. [Editor’s note.] readings 135 thing quite diﬀerent from what we read when he is there (or when we think about him). Or rather, to read in him that he is certainly something diﬀerent, perhaps something completely diﬀerent, from from what we read in him. Every being cries out silently to be read diﬀerently. We read, but also we are read by, others. Interferences in these readings. Forcing someone to read himself as we read him (slavery). Forcing others to read us as we read ourselves (conquest). A mechanical process. More often than not a dialogue between deaf people. Charity and injustice can only be deﬁned by readings, and thus no deﬁnition ﬁts them. The miracle of the good thief was not that he thought of God, but that he recognized God in his neighbour. Peter, before the cock crew, no longer recognized God in Christ. Others are slain for the sake of false prophets in whom they mistakenly read God. Who can ﬂatter himself that he will read aright? We can be unjust through the will to oﬀend justice or through a wrong reading of justice—but the second is nearly always the case. What love of justice is a guarantee against a bad reading? What is the diﬀerence between the just and the unjust if all invariably act according to the justice they read? Joan of Arc: those who declaim about her today would nearly all have condemned her. Moreover, her judges did not condemn the saint, the virgin, etc., but the witch, the heretic, etc.1 Causes of wrong reading: public opinion, the passions. 1 Cf. the texts of the Gospel concerning those who read wrongly: ‘Father forgive them, for they know not what they do.’ ‘The hour will come when whoever killeth you will think that he doeth God service. [Editor’s note.] 136 gravity and grace Public opinion is a very strong cause. People read in the story of Joan of Arc what contemporary public opinion dictates. But it has been uncertain. And Christ . . . In ﬁctitious moral problems, calumny plays no part. What hope is there for innocence if it is not recognized? Readings. Reading—except where there is a certain quality of attention—obeys the law of gravity. We read the opinions suggested by gravity (the preponderant part played by the passions and by social conformity in the judgments we form of men and events). With a higher quality of attention our reading discovers gravity itself, and various systems of possible balance. Superposed readings: To read necessity behind sensation, to read order behind necessity, to read God behind order. ‘Judge not’: Christ himself does not judge. He is our judgment. Suﬀering innocence is the measure. Judgment; perspective. In this sense all judgment judges him who forms it. Not to judge. This is not indiﬀerence or abstention, it is transcendent judgment, the imitation of that divine judgment which is not possible for us. THE RING OF GYGES We give the faults of other civilizations as a proof of the inadequacy of the religions on which they depend. Yet if we look at the record of Europe for the last twenty centuries we have no diﬃculty in ﬁnding faults which are at least equivalent to theirs. The destruction of America by massacre and of Africa by slavery, the massacres in the South of France—surely these things are no better than the homosexuality in Greece or the orgiastic rites of the Orient. But it is said that in Europe the blemishes existed in spite of the perfection of Christianity and that in the other civilizations they existed because of the imperfection of religion. An outstanding example, to be carefully pondered, of the technique of error—setting aside. In estimating the value of India or Greece, we compare the good with the evil. In estimating the value of Christianity, we set the evil aside.1 1 Simone Weil here illustrates a profound truth by a somewhat ill-chosen example. When a Christian (an Inquisitor for instance) behaves with cruelty it is quite permissible to say that he is acting in such a way in spite of his religion, 138 gravity and grace We set things aside without knowing we are doing so; that is precisely where the danger lies. Or, which is still worse, we set them aside by an act of the will, but by an act of the will that is furtive in relation to ourselves. Afterwards we do not any longer know that we have set anything aside. We do not want to know it, and, by dint of not wanting to know it, we reach the point of not being able to know it. This faculty of setting things aside opens the door to every sort of crime. Outside those departments where education and training have forged solid links, it provides a key to absolute licence. That is what makes it possible for men to behave in such an incoherent fashion, particularly wherever the social, collective emotions play a part (war, national or class hatreds, patriotism for a party or a church). Whatever is surrounded with the prestige of the social element is set in a diﬀerent place from other things and is exempt from certain connexions. We also make use of this key when we give way to the allurements of pleasure. I use it when, day after day, I put oﬀ the fulﬁlment of some obligation. I separate the obligation and the passage of time. There is nothing more desirable than to get rid of this key. It should be thrown to the bottom of a well whence it can never again be recovered. The ring of Gyges who has become invisible—this is precisely the act of setting aside: setting oneself aside from the crime one commits; not establishing the connexion between the two. The act of throwing away the key, of throwing away the ring of Gyges—this is the eﬀort proper to the will. It is the act by which, in pain and blindness, we make our way out of the cave. Gyges: ‘I have become king, and the other king has been since his religion enjoins charity above all things. When, however, a Nazi acts in the same way it is allowable to attribute his conduct (at least in part) to his doctrine, since his doctrine permits it. [Editor’s note.] the ring of gyges 139 assassinated.’ No connexion whatever between these two things. There we have the ring! The owner of a factory: ‘I enjoy this and that expensive luxury and my workmen are miserably poor.’ He may be very sincerely sorry for his workmen and yet not form the connexion. For no connexion is formed if thought does not bring it about. Two and two remain indeﬁnitely as two and two unless thought adds them together to make them into four. We hate the people who try to make us form the connexions we do not want to form. Justice consists of establishing between analogous things connexions identical with those between similar terms, even when some of these things concern us personally and are an object of attachment for us. This virtue is situated at the point of contact of the natural and the supernatural. It belongs to the realm of the will and of clear understanding, hence it is part of the cave (for our clarity is a twilight), but we cannot hold on to it unless we pass into the light. MEANING OF THE UNIVERSE1 We are a part which has to imitate the whole. The ātman. Let the soul of a man take the whole universe for its body. Let its relation to the whole universe be like that of a collector to his collection, or of one of the soldiers who died crying out ‘Long live the Emperor!’ to Napoleon. The soul transports itself outside the actual body into something else. Let it therefore transport itself into the whole universe. We should identify ourselves with the universe itself. Everything that is less than the universe is subject to suﬀering. Even though I die, the universe continues. That does not console me if I am anything other than the universe. If, however, the 1 The identiﬁcation of the soul with the universe has no connexion here with pantheism. One can only fully accept the blind necessity which rules the universe by holding closely through love to the God who transcends the universe. Cf. above: ‘This world, in so far as it is quite empty of God, is God himself.’ [Editor’s a note.] meaning of the universe 141 universe is, as it were, another body to my soul, my death ceases to have any more importance for me than that of a stranger. The same is true of my suﬀerings. Let the whole universe be for me, in relation to my body, what the stick of a blind man is in relation to his hand. His sensibility is really no longer in his hand but at the end of the stick. An apprenticeship is necessary. To limit one’s love to the pure object is the same thing as to extend it to the whole universe. To change the relationship between ourselves and the world in the same way as, through apprenticeship, the workman changes the relationship between himself and the tool. Getting hurt: this is the trade entering into the body. May all suﬀering make the universe enter into the body. Habit, skill: a transference of the consciousness into an object other than the body itself. May this object be the universe, the seasons, the sun, the stars. The relationship between the body and the tool changes during apprenticeship. We have to change the relationship between our body and the world. We do not become detached, we change our attachment. We must attach ourselves to the all. We have to feel the universe through each sensation. What does it matter then whether it be pleasure or pain? If our hand is shaken by a beloved friend when we meet again after a long separation, what does it matter that he squeezes it hard and hurts us? There is a degree of pain on reaching which we lose the world. But afterwards peace comes. And if the paroxysm returns, so does the peace which follows it. If we realize this, that very degree of pain turns into an expectation of peace, and as a result does not break our contact with the world. 142 gravity and grace Two tendencies with opposite extremes: to destroy the self for the sake of the universe, or to destroy the universe for the sake of the self. He who has not been able to become nothing runs the risk of reaching a moment when everything other than himself ceases to exist. External necessity or an inner need as imperative as that of breathing. ‘Let us become the central breath.’ Even if a pain in our chest makes respiration extremely painful, we still breathe, we cannot help it. We have to associate the rhythm of the life of the body with that of the world, to feel this association constantly and to feel also the perpetual exchange of matter by which the human being bathes in the world. Things which nothing can take from a human being as long as he lives: in the way of movement over which his will has a hold, respiration; in the way of perception, space (even in a dungeon, even with our eyes blinded and our ear-drums pierced, as long as we live we are aware of space). We have to attach to these things the thoughts which we desire that no circumstances should be able to deprive us of. To love our neighbour as ourselves does not mean that we should love all people equally, for I do not have an equal love for all the modes of existence of myself. Nor does it mean that we should never make them suﬀer, for I do not refuse to make myself suﬀer. But we should have with each person the relationship of one conception of the universe to another conception of the universe, and not to a part of the universe. Not to accept an event in the world is to wish that the world did not exist. That is within my power—for myself. If I wish it I obtain it. I am then an excrescence produced by the world. meaning of the universe 143 Wishes in folklore: what makes wishes dangerous is the fact that they are granted. To wish that the world did not exist is to wish that I, just as I am, may be everything. Would that the entire universe, from this pebble at my feet to the most distant stars, existed for me at every moment as much as Agnès did for Arnolphe or his money-box did for Harpagon. If I choose, the world can belong to me like the treasure does to the miser. But it is a treasure that does not increase. This irreducible ‘I’ which is the irreducible basis of my suﬀering—I have to make this ‘I’ universal. What does it matter that there should never be joy in me since there is perfect joy perpetually in God! And the same is true with regard to beauty, intelligence and all things. To desire one’s salvation is wrong, not because it is selﬁsh (it is not in man’s power to be selﬁsh), but because it is an orientation of the soul towards a merely particular and contingent possibility instead of towards a completeness of being, instead of towards the good which exists unconditionally. All that I wish for exists, or has existed, or will exist somewhere. For I am incapable of complete invention. In that case how should I not be satisﬁed? Br . . . I could not prevent myself from imagining him living, imagining his house as a possible place for me to listen to his delightful conversation. Thus the consciousness of the fact of his death made a frightful desert. Cold with metallic coldness. What did it matter to me that there were other people to love? The love 144 gravity and grace that I directed towards him, together with the outlines shaping in my mind of exchanges of ideas which could take place with no one else, were without an object. Now I no longer imagine him as alive and his death has ceased to be intolerable for me. The memory of him is sweet to me. But there are others whom I did not know then and whose death would aﬀect me in the same way. D . . . is not dead, but the friendship that I bore him is dead, and a like sorrow goes with it. He is no more than a shadow. But I cannot imagine the same transformation for X . . ., Y . . ., Z . . ., who, nevertheless, so short a time ago did not exist in my consciousness. Just as parents ﬁnd it impossible to realize that three years ago their child was non-existent, I ﬁnd it impossible to realize that I have not always known the beings I love. I think I must love wrongly: otherwise things would not seem like this to me. My love would not be attached to a few beings. It would be extended to everything which is worthy of love. ‘Be ye perfect even as your Father who is in heaven. . . .’ Love in the same way as the sun gives light. Love has to be brought back to ourselves in order that it may be shed on all things. God alone loves all things and he only loves himself. To love in God is far more diﬃcult than we think. I can taint the whole universe with my wretchedness without feeling it or collecting it together within myself. We have to endure the discordance between imagination and fact. It is better to say ‘I am suﬀering’ than ‘this landscape is ugly’. We must not want to change our own weight in the balance of the world—the golden balance of Zeus. The whole cow gives milk although the milk is only drawn from the udder. In the same way the world is the producer of saintliness. METAXU All created things refuse to be for me as ends. Such is God’s extreme mercy towards me. And that very thing is what constitutes evil. Evil is the form which God’s mercy takes in this world. This world is the closed door. It is a barrier. And at the same time it is the way through. Two prisoners whose cells adjoin communicate with each other by knocking on the wall. The wall is the thing which separates them but it is also their means of communication. It is the same with us and God. Every separation is a link. By putting all our desire for good into a thing we make that thing a condition of our existence. But we do not on that account make of it a good. Merely to exist is not enough for us. The essence of created things is to be intermediaries. They are 146 gravity and grace intermediaries leading from one to the other and there is no end to this. They are intermediaries leading to God. We have to experience them as such. The bridges of the Greeks. We have inherited them but we do not know how to use them. We thought they were intended to have houses built upon them. We have erected skyscrapers on them to which we ceaselessly add storeys. We no longer know that they are bridges, things made so that we may pass along them, and that by passing along them we go towards God. Only he who loves God with a supernatural love can look upon means simply as means. Power (and money, power’s master key) is means at its purest. For that very reason, it is the supreme end for all those who have not understood. This world, the realm of necessity, oﬀers us absolutely nothing except means. Our will is for ever sent from one means to another like a billiard ball. All our desires are contradictory, like the desire for food. I want the person I love to love me. If, however, he is totally devoted to me, he does not exist any longer, and I cease to love him. And as long as he is not totally devoted to me he does not love me enough. Hunger and repletion. Desire is evil and illusory, yet without desire we should not seek for that which is truly absolute, truly boundless. We have to have experienced it. Misery of those beings from whom fatigue takes away that supplementary energy which is the source of desire. Misery also of those who are blinded by desire. We have to ﬁx our desire to the axis of the poles. metaxu 147 What is it a sacrilege to destroy? Not that which is base, for that is of no importance. Not that which is high, for, even should we want to, we cannot touch that. The metaxu. The metaxu form the region of good and evil. No human being should be deprived of his metaxu, that is to say of those relative and mixed blessings (home, country, traditions, culture, etc.) which warm and nourish the soul and without which, short of sainthood, a human life is not possible. The true earthly blessings are metaxu. We can respect those of others only in so far as we regard those we ourselves possess as metaxu. This implies that we are already making our way towards the point where it is possible to do without them. For example, if we are to respect foreign countries, we must make of our own country, not an idol, but a stepping-stone towards God. All the faculties being freely exercised without becoming mixed, starting from a single, unique principle. It is the microcosm, the imitation of the world. Christ according to Saint Thomas. The just man of the Republic. When Plato speaks of specialization he speaks of the specialization of man’s faculties and not of the specialization of men; the same applies to hierarchy. The temporal having no meaning except by and for the spiritual, but not being mixed with the spiritual—leading to it by nostalgia, by reaching beyond itself. It is the temporal seen as a bridge, a metaxu. It is the Greek and Provençal vocation. Civilization of the Greeks. No adoration of force. The temporal was only a bridge. Among the states of the soul they did not seek intensity but purity. BEAUTY Beauty is the harmony of chance and the good. Beauty is necessity which, while remaining in conformity with its own law and with that alone, is obedient to the good. The subject of science is the beautiful (that is to say order, proportion, harmony) in so far as it is suprasensible and necessary. The subject of art is sensible and contingent beauty discerned through the network of chance and evil. The beautiful in nature is a union of the sensible impression and of the sense of necessity. Things must be like that (in the ﬁrst place), and, precisely, they are like that. Beauty captivates the ﬂesh in order to obtain permission to pass right to the soul. Among other unions of contraries found in beauty there is that of the instantaneous and the eternal. beauty 149 The beautiful is that which we can contemplate. A statue, a picture which we can gaze at for hours. The beautiful is something on which we can ﬁx our attention. Gregorian music. When the same things are sung for hours each day and every day, whatever falls even slightly short of supreme excellence becomes unendurable and is eliminated. The Greeks looked at their temples. We can endure the statues in the Luxembourg because we do not look at them. A picture such as one could place in the cell of a criminal sentenced to solitary conﬁnement for life without it being an atrocity, on the contrary. Only drama without movement is truly beautiful. Shakespeare’s tragedies are second-class with the exception of Lear. Those of Racine, third-class except for Phèdre. Those of Corneille of the nth class. A work of art has an author and yet, when it is perfect, it has something which is essentially anonymous about it. It imitates the anonymity of divine art. In the same way the beauty of the world proves there to be a God who is personal and impersonal at the same time and is neither the one nor the other separately. The beautiful is a carnal attraction which keeps us at a distance and implies a renunciation. This includes the renunciation of that which is most deep-seated, the imagination. We want to eat all the other objects of desire. The beautiful is that which we desire without wishing to eat it. We desire that it should be. We have to remain quite still and unite ourselves with that which we desire yet do not approach. We unite ourselves to God in this way: we cannot approach him. Distance is the soul of the beautiful. 150 gravity and grace The attitude of looking and waiting is the attitude which corresponds with the beautiful. As long as one can go on conceiving, wishing, longing, the beautiful does not appear. That is why in all beauty we ﬁnd contradiction, bitterness and absence which are irreducible. Poetry: impossible pain and joy. A poignant touch, nostalgia. Such is Provençal and English poetry. A joy which by reason of its unmixed purity hurts, a pain which by reason of its unmixed purity brings peace. Beauty: a fruit which we look at without trying to seize it. The same with an aﬄiction which we contemplate without drawing back. A double movement of descent: to do again, out of love, what gravity does. Is not the double movement of descent the key to all art?1 This movement of descent, the mirror of grace, is the essence of all music. All the rest only serves to enshrine it. The rising of the notes is a purely sensorial rising. The descent is at the same time a sensorial descent and a spiritual rising. Here we have the paradise which every being longs for: where the slope of nature makes us rise towards the good. In everything which gives us the pure authentic feeling of beauty there really is the presence of God. There is as it were an incarnation of God in the world and it is indicated by beauty. The beautiful is the experimental proof that the incarnation is possible. Hence all art of the highest order is religious in essence. (That 1 Descendit ad inferos . . . So, in another order, great art redeems gravity by espousing it out of love. [Editor’s note.] beauty 151 is what people have forgotten today.) A Gregorian melody is as powerful a witness as the death of a martyr. If the beautiful is the real presence of God in matter and if contact with the beautiful is a sacrament in the full sense of the word, how is it that there are so many perverted aesthetes? Nero. Is it like the hunger of those who frequent black masses for the consecrated hosts? Or is it, more probably, because these people do not devote themselves to what is genuinely beautiful, but to a bad imitation? For, just as there, is an art which is divine, so there is one which is demoniacal. It was no doubt the latter that Nero loved. A great deal of our art is of the devil. A person who is passionately fond of music may quite well be a perverted person—but I should ﬁnd it hard to believe this of any one who thirsted for Gregorian chanting. We must certainly have committed crimes which have made us accursed, since we have lost all the poetry of the universe. Art has no immediate future because all art is collective and there is no more collective life (there are only dead collections of people), and also because of this breaking of the true pact between the body and the soul. Greek art coincided with the beginning of geometry and with athleticism, the art of the Middle Ages with the craftsmen’s guilds, the art of the Renaissance with the beginning of mechanics, etc. . . . Since 1914 there has been a complete cut. Even comedy is almost impossible. There is only room for satire (when was it easier to understand Juvenal?). Art will never be reborn except from amidst a general anarchy— it will be epic no doubt, because aﬄiction will have simpliﬁed a great many things. . . . Is it therefore quite useless for you to envy Leonardo or Bach. Greatness in our times must take a different course. Moreover it can only be solitary, obscure and without an echo . . . (but without an echo, no art). ALGEBRA Money, mechanization, algebra. The three monsters of contemporary civilization. Complete analogy. Algebra and money are essentially levellers, the ﬁrst intellectually, the second eﬀectively. About ﬁfty years ago the life of the Provençal peasants ceased to be like that of the Greek peasants described by Hesiod. The destruction of science as conceived by the Greeks took place at about the same period. Money and algebra triumphed simultaneously. The relation of the sign to the thing signiﬁed is being destroyed, the game of exchanges between signs is being multiplied of itself and for itself. And the increasing complication demands that there should be signs for signs. . . . Among the characteristics of the modern world we must not algebra 153 forget the impossibility of thinking in concrete terms of the relationship between eﬀort and the result of eﬀort. There are too many intermediaries. As in the other cases, this relationship which does not lie in any thought, lies in a thing: money. As collective thought cannot exist as thought, it passes into things (signs, machines . . .). Hence the paradox: it is the thing which thinks and the man who is reduced to the state of a thing. There is no collective thought. On the other hand our science is collective like our technics. Specialization. We inherit not only results but methods which we do not understand. For the matter of that the two are inseparable, for the results of algebra provide methods for the other sciences. To make an inventory or criticism of our civilization—what does that mean? To try to expose in precise terms the trap which has made man the slave of his own inventions. How has unconsciousness inﬁltrated itself into methodical thought and action? To escape by a return to the primitive state is a lazy solution. We have to rediscover the original pact between the spirit and the world in this very civilization of which we form a part. But it is a task which is beyond our power on account of the shortness of life and the impossibility of collaboration and of succession. That is no reason for not undertaking it. The situation of all of us is comparable to that of Socrates when he was awaiting death in his prison and began to learn to play the lyre. . . . At any rate we shall have lived. . . . The spirit, overcome by the weight of quantity, has no longer any other criterion than eﬃciency. Modern life is given over to immoderation. Immoderation invades everything: actions and thought, public and private life. 154 gravity and grace The decadence of art is due to it. There is no more balance anywhere. The Catholic movement is to some extent in reaction against this; the Catholic ceremonies, at least, have remained intact. But then they are unrelated to the rest of existence. Capitalism has brought about the emancipation of collective humanity with respect to nature. But this collective humanity has itself taken on with respect to the individual the oppressive function formerly exercised by nature. This is true even with material things: ﬁre, water etc. The community has taken possession of all these natural forces. Question: can this emancipation, won by society, be transferred to the individual? THE SOCIAL IMPRINT1 Man is a slave in so far as between action and its eﬀect, between eﬀort and the ﬁnished work, there is the interference of alien wills. This is the case both with the slave and the master today. Never can man deal directly with the conditions of his own action. Society forms a screen between nature and man. To be in direct contact with nature and not with men is the only discipline. To be dependent on an alien will is to be a slave. This, however, is the fate of all men. The slave is dependent on the master and the master on the slave. This is a situation which makes us either servile or tyrannical or both at once (omnia serviliter pro dominatione). On the contrary, when we are face to face with inert nature our only resource is to think. 1 The title of this chapter is La Lettre Sociale—cf. Alfred de Vigny: Si tu frémis de voir sur ton épaule La lettre sociale écrite avec du fer . . . 156 gravity and grace The notion of oppression is, in short, a stupidity: one only has to read the Iliad. And the notion of an oppressive class is even more stupid. We can only speak of an oppressive structure of society. The diﬀerence between a slave and a citizen (Montesquieu, Rousseau . . .): a slave is subject to his master and a citizen to the laws. It may happen that the master is very gentle and the laws very harsh: that changes nothing. Everything lies in the distance between caprice and rule. Why is subordination to caprice slavery? The root cause is found in the relation between the soul and time. He who is subject to the arbitrary is suspended on the thread of time; he has to wait (the most humiliating situation possible . . .) for what the following moment will bring him. He does not dispose of his moments; for him the present is no longer a lever by which he can bring pressure to bear on the future. To have to deal directly with things frees the spirit. To have to deal directly with men debases us if we are dependent on them, whether this dependence be in the form of submission or of command. Why these men between Nature and me? Never to have to take into account an unknown thought . . . (for then we are given over to chance). Remedy: apart from the ties of brotherhood, to treat men like a spectacle and never seek for friendship; to live in the midst of men as in that crowded railway carriage between Saint-Etienne and Le Puy. . . . Above all never to allow oneself to dream of friendship. Everything has to be paid for. Rely only on yourself. The powerful, if they carry oppression beyond a certain point, necessarily end by making themselves adored by their slaves. For the thought of being under absolute compulsion, the plaything of another, is unendurable for a human being. Hence, if every the social imprint 157 way of escape from this constraint is taken from him, there is nothing left for him to do but to persuade himself that he does the things he is forced to do willingly, that is to say, to substitute devotion for obedience. And sometimes he will even strive to do more than he is obliged and will suﬀer less thereby, in the same way as children when they are playing will endure with a laugh physical suﬀering which they would ﬁnd unbearable if it were inﬂicted on them as a punishment. It is by this twist that slavery debases the soul: this devotion is in fact based on a lie, since the reasons for it cannot bear investigation. (In this respect the Catholic principle of obedience should be considered as a liberating principle, whereas Protestantism is based on the idea of sacriﬁce and devotion.) The only way of salvation is to replace the unendurable idea of compulsion, not by the illusion of devotion, but by the notion of necessity. On the other hand revolt, if it does not immediately pass into deﬁnite and eﬀective action, is always changed into its opposite through the feeling of utter impotence which results from it. In other words the chief support of the oppressor lies precisely in the unavailing revolt of the oppressed. It would be possible to write the novel of a conscript of Napoleon from this point of view. Moreover, the master is deceived too by the fallacy of devotion. We must always consider men in power as dangerous things. We must keep out of their way as much as we can without losing our self-respect. And if one day we are driven, under pain of cowardice, to go and break ourselves against their power, we must consider ourselves as vanquished by the nature of things and not by men. One can be in a prison cell and in chains, but one can also be smitten with blindness or paralysis. There is no diﬀerence. The only way to preserve our dignity when submission is 158 gravity and grace forced upon us is to consider our chief as a thing. Every man is the slave of necessity, but the conscious slave is far superior. Social problem. To limit to the minimum the proportion of the supernatural indispensable to make the atmosphere of social life possible to breathe. Everything which tends to increase it is bad (it is tempting God). We must eliminate aﬄiction as much as we can from social life, for aﬄiction only serves the purposes of grace and society is not a society of the elect. There will always be enough aﬄiction for the elect. ISRAEL Christendom has become totalitarian, conquering, and exterminating, because it has not developed the idea of God’s absence and non-activity here below. It has attached itself to Jehovah no less than to Christ, and conceived of Providence in the manner of the Old Testament. Only Israel could stand up to Rome, because it resembled it; and this is how the birth of Christianity was marked with the Roman stain before it became the oﬃcial religion of the Empire. The evil done by Rome has never been truly redressed. God’s promises to Moses and Joshua were purely temporal, made at a time when Egypt was moving towards the eternal salvation of the soul. Having refused the Egyptian revelation, the Hebrews got the God they deserved: a carnal and collective God who, right up to the exile, did not speak (except in the Psalms?) to a single soul. . . . The only pure individuals in the poems of the Old Testament are Abel, Enoch, Noah, Melchisedek, Job, and Daniel. It is not surprising that little could be expected of such a 160 gravity and grace people, fugitive slaves, conquerors of a paradise which had been fashioned by civilizations in whose labour they had not shared and which they destroyed through massacres. To speak of an ‘educational God’ in connection with this people is a cruel joke. It is not astonishing that there should be so much evil in a civilization—ours—contaminated to the core, in its very inspiration, by this terrible lie. The curse of Israel rests on Christendom. Israel meant atrocities, the Inquisition, the extermination of heretics and inﬁdels. Israel meant (and to a certain extent still does . . .) capitalism. Israel means totalitarianism, especially with regard to its worst enemies. There can be no personal contact between man and God except through the person of the Mediator. Without the latter, God can only be present to man collectively, nationally. Israel chose the national God and simultaneously rejected the Mediator; it may, at one time or another, have moved towards true monotheism, but it always fell back on, and was unable not to fall back on, the God of the tribe. Anyone who has contact with the supernatural is essentially sovereign, for in the form of the inﬁnitely small he is a presence in society which transcends the social order. But the place he occupies in the social hierarchy is completely immaterial. As for what is great in the social order, only he is capable of it who who has harnessed a large part of the Great Beast’s energy. But he can have no share in the supernatural. Moses, Joshuah—that is the share in the supernatural of those who have harnessed much social energy. Israel was an attempt at supernatural social life. No country, presumably, has suceeded better at this kind of thing. Useless to start again. The result shows just what sort of divine revelation the Great Beast is capable of. Isaiah the ﬁrst to bring pure illumination. israel 161 Israel stood up to Rome because its God, even though immaterial, was a temporal sovereign on a par with the Emperor, and thanks to this Christianity could be born. The religion of Israel was not noble enough to be fragile, and due to its solidity could protect belief in the most elevated.1 For the Passion to be possible, it was necessary that Israel ignore the idea of the Incarnation. Rome, too (these were, perhaps, the only two peoples to ignore it). But it was necessary that Israel have some share in God. As great a share as possible without being spiritual or supernatural. Exclusively collective religion. It was because of this ignorance, this darkness, that it became the chosen people. So one can understand Isaiah, ‘I have hardenend their hearts, so that they may not hear my words.’ That is why, in Israel, everything is sullied by sin, as there is no purity without participating in the divine incarnation, so that a lack of such participation should be obvious. Jacob’s struggle with the angel – is not this the great blemish? ‘The Eternal . . . will do justice to Jacob according to his works. In his mother’s womb did he already displace his brother, and, in his manliness, triumph over a God. He fought against an angel and was vanquished, and here he cries and asks for mercy . . .’ Isn’t this the great tragedy, to battle against God and not to be vanquished? Israel. From Abraham onwards (including himself, but excepting some of the prophets), and as though it had been planned, everything becomes sullied and foul, as if to demonstrate quite clearly: Look! There it is, evil! 1 Note, as Simone Weil does here, that on the one hand the history of Israel contains ﬂashes of pure mysticism (Isaiah, etc.); and that, on the other hand, incipient Christanity was protected by its Jewish ‘shell’. This is already to legitimate Israel’s divine mission. 162 gravity and grace A people chosen for its blindness, chosen to be Christ’s executioner. The Jews, that handful of uprooted people, have caused the uprootedness of the whole terrestrial globe. Their involvement in Christianity has made of Christendom, in regard to its own past, something uprooted. The orientation of the Enlightenment, 1789, secularism, etc. have inﬁnitely increased this uprooting, through the lie of progress. And uprooted Europe has uprooted the rest of the world, by colonial conquest. Capitalism, totalitarianism, have a share in this progressive uprootedness; the antisemites, naturally, propagate the Jewish inﬂuence. But before Assyria in the Orient and Rome in the Occident uprooted through poison, they had alreardy uprooted with the broadsword. It was primitive Christianity that fabricated the poisonous idea of progress, through the notion of a divine education that was to mould man and enable him to receive the message of Christ. This accorded with the expectation as imminent phenomena of a universal conversion of nations and the end of the world. But as neither of these had come about, the notion of progress was, after seventeen centuries, extended beyond the moment of the Christian Revelation. At this point, it had to turn itself against Christianity. The other poisons mixed with the truth in Christianity are Jewish in origin. The former is speciﬁcally Christian. The metaphor of a divine education dissolves the individual destiny, which alone matters for salvation, into the destiny of a people. Christianity wanted to look for a harmony in history. This is the germ of Hegel and Marx. The notion of history as a directed continuity is a Christian notion. It seems to me that few ideas could be more utterly mistaken. israel 163 Looking for harmony in the future, in what is contrary to eternity. Bad union of contraries. Humanism and what has arisen out of it, is not a return to antiquity, but a development of poisons that are internal to Christianity. It is supernatural love that is free. In trying to force it, one substitutes for it a natural love. Conversely, however, freedom without supernatural love—that of 1789—is entirely empty, a simple abstraction, with no possibility of ever becoming real. THE GREAT BEAST The Great Beast1 is the only object of idolatry, the only ersatz of God, the only imitation of something which is inﬁnitely far from me and which is I myself. If we could be egoistical it would be very pleasant. It would be a rest. But literally we cannot. It is impossible for me to take myself as an end or, in consequence, my fellow man as an end, since he is my fellow. Nor can I take any material thing, because matter is still less capable of having ﬁnality conferred upon it than human beings are. Only one thing can be taken as an end, for in relation to the human person it possesses a kind of transcendence: this is the collective. The collective is the object of all idolatry, this it is 1 On the origin of this myth cf. Plato, Republic, Book VI. To adore the ‘Great Beast’ is to think and act in conformity with the prejudices and reactions of the multitude to the detriment of all personal search for truth and goodness. [Editor’s note.] the great beast 165 which chains us to the earth. In the case of avarice: gold is of the social order. In the case of ambition: power is of the social order. Science and art ate full of the social element also. And love? Love is more or less of an exception: that is why we can go to God through love, not through avarice or ambition. Yet the social element is not absent from love (passions excited by princes, celebrated people, all those who have prestige . . .). There are two goods of the same denomination but radically diﬀerent from each other: one which is the opposite of evil and one which is the absolute. The absolute has no opposite. The relative is not the opposite of the absolute; it is derived from it through a relationship which is not commutative. That which we want is the absolute good. That which is within our reach is the good which is correlated to evil. We betake ourselves to it by mistake, like the prince who starts to make love to the maid instead of the mistress. The error is due to the clothes. It is the social which throws the colour of the absolute over the relative. The remedy is in the idea of relationship. Relationship breaks its way out of the social. It is the monopoly of the individual. Society is the cave. The way out is solitude. To relate belongs to the solitary spirit. No crowd can conceive relationship. ‘This is good or bad in relation to . . .’, ‘in so far as . . .’ That escapes the crowd. A crowd cannot add things together. He who is above social life returns to it when he wishes, not so he who is below. It is the same with everything. A relationship which is not commutative between what is better and what is less good. The vegetative and the social are the two realms where the good does not enter. Christ redeemed the vegetative, not the social. He did not pray for the world. 166 gravity and grace The social order is irreducibly that of the prince of this world. Our only duty with regard to the social is to try to limit the evil of it. (Richelieu: the salvation of states lies only in this world.) A society like the Church, which claims to be divine is perhaps more dangerous on account of the ersatz good which it contains than on account of the evil which sullies it. Something of the social labelled divine: an intoxicating mixture which carries with it every sort of licence. Devil disguised. Conscience is deceived by the social. Our supplementary energy (imaginative) is to a great extent taken up with the social. It has to be detached from it. That is the most diﬃcult of detachments. Meditation on the social mechanism is in this respect a puriﬁcation of the ﬁrst importance. To contemplate the social is as good a way of detachment as to retire from the world. That is why I have not been wrong to rub shoulders with politics for so long. It is only by entering the transcendental, the supernatural, the authentically spiritual order that man rises above the social. Until then, whatever he may do, the social is transcendent in relation to him. On the non-supernatural plane, society is that which keeps evil (certain forms of it) away by forming as it were a barrier. A society of criminals or people given over to vice, even if only composed of a handful of men, destroys this barrier. But what is it which impels people to enter such a society? Either necessity, or laxity, or, usually, a mixture of the two. They do not think they are becoming involved, for they do not know that, apart from the supernatural, it is only society which prevents us from falling naturally into the most fearful vice and crime. They do not know that they are going to become the great beast 167 diﬀerent, for they do not know the extent of the region within themselves which can be changed by environment. They always become involved without knowing. Rome is the Great Beast of atheism and materialism, adoring nothing but itself. Israel is the Great Beast of religion. Neither the one nor the other is likable. The Great Beast is always repulsive. Would a society in which only gravity reigned be able to exist, or is a little of the supernatural element a vital necessity? In Rome, perhaps, there was only gravity. With the Hebrews too, perhaps. Their God was heavy. Perhaps there was only one ancient people absolutely without mysticism: Rome. By what mystery? It was an artiﬁcial city, made up of fugitives, just as Israel was. The Great Beast of Plato. The whole of Marxism, in so far as it is true, is contained in the page of Plato on the Great Beast; and its refutation is there too. The power of the social element. Agreement between several men brings with it a feeling of reality. It brings with it also a sense of duty. Divergence, where this agreement is concerned, appears as a sin. Hence all returns to the fold are possible. The state of conformity is an imitation of grace. By a strange mystery—which is connected with the power of the social element—a profession can confer on quite ordinary men in their exercise of it, virtues which, if they were extended to all circumstances of life, would make of them heroes or saints. But the power of the social element makes these virtues natural. Accordingly they need a compensation. Pharisees: ‘Verily I say unto you, they have received their 168 gravity and grace reward.’ Inversely, Christ could have said of the publicans and prostitutes: ‘Verily I say unto you, they have received their punishment’—that is to say social reprobation. In so far as they have received this, the Father who is in secret does not punish them. Whereas the sins which are not accompanied by social reprobation receive their full measure of punishment from the Father who is in secret. Thus social reprobation is a favour on the part of destiny. It turns into a supplementary evil, however, for those who, under the pressure of this reprobation, manufacture for themselves eccentric social surroundings within which they have full licence. Criminal and homosexual circles, etc. The service of the false God (of the social Beast under whatever form it may be) puriﬁes evil by eliminating its horror. Nothing seems evil to those who serve it except failure in its service. The service of the true God, on the other hand, allows the horror of evil to remain and even makes it more intense. Whilst this evil horriﬁes us, we yet love it as emanating from the will of God. Those who think today that one of the adversaries is on the side of the good, think also that that side will be victorious.1 To watch a good, loved as such, condemned as it were by the oncoming tide of events is an intolerable suﬀering. The idea that that which does not exist any more may be a good is painful and we thrust it aside. That is submission to the Great Beast. The force of soul of the Communists comes from the fact that they are going, not only towards what they believe to be the good, but towards what they believe will surely and soon be brought about. Thus without being saints—they are a long way from that—they can endure dangers and suﬀerings which only a saint would bear for justice alone. 1 These lines were written in 1942. [Editor’s note.] the great beast 169 In some respects the state of mind of the Communists is very analogous to that of the early Christians. That eschatological propaganda explains very well the persecutions of the ﬁrst period. ‘He to whom little is forgiven, the same loveth little.’ This concerns someone with whom social virtue occupies a very large place. Grace ﬁnds little room to spare in him. Obedience to the Great Beast which conforms to the good—that is social virtue. A Pharisee is someone who is virtuous out of obedience to the Great Beast. Charity can and should love in every country all that is a condition of the spiritual development of individuals, that is to say, on the one hand, social order, even if it is bad, as being less bad than disorder, on the other hand the language, ceremonies, customs—all that contains beauty—all the poetry which the life of a country embraces. But a nation as such cannot be the object of supernatural love. It has no soul. It is a Great Beast. And yet a city . . . But that is not social; it is a human environment of which one is no more conscious than of the air one breathes. A contact with nature, the past, tradition. Rootedness lies in something other than the social. Patriotism. We must not have any love other than charity. A nation cannot be an object of charity. But a country can be one—as an environment bearing traditions which are eternal. Every country can be that. SOCIAL HARMONY It is impossible for an order which is higher and therefore inﬁnitely above another to be represented in it except by something inﬁnitely small. A grain of mustard seed, an instant mirroring eternity, etc . . . The point of contact between a circle and a straight line (a tangent). This is the presence of the higher order in the lower under the form of what is inﬁnitely minute. Christ is the point of tangency between humanity and God. Unobtrusiveness—the inﬁnitesimal character of pure good . . . Equilibrium is the submission of one order to another, the order which transcends the ﬁrst being present in it under the form of something inﬁnitely small. Thus a true royalty would constitute the perfect city. Each one, in society, is the inﬁnitely small representative of the order transcending and inﬁnitely greater than the social. social harmony 171 The love of the citizen for his city and of the vassal for his lord should be a supernatural love. Equilibrium alone destroys and annuls force. Social order can be nothing but an equilibrium of forces. As it cannot be expected that a man without grace should be just, there must be a society organized in such a way that injustices punish each other through a perpetual oscillation. Equilibrium alone reduces force to nothing. If we know in what way society is unbalanced, we must do what we can to add weight to the lighter scale. Although the weight may consist of evil, in handling it with this intention, perhaps we do not become deﬁled. But we must have formed a conception of equilibrium and be ever ready to change sides like justice, ‘that fugitive from the camp of conquerors’. The meaning of the famous passage in the Georgics about geometry. No unlimited development is possible in the nature of things; the world is entirely based on measure and equilibrium, and it is the same with the city. All ambition is an absence of measure, absurdity. γεωµετρα γὰρ αµελε . What the ambitious man entirely forgets is the notion of relationship. ‘Peuple stupide à qui ma puissance m’enchaine, Hélas! mon orgueil même a besoin de tes bras.’1 The feudal bond, in making obedience a matter between one 1 ‘Foolish people, to whom my power enthrals me, Alas! my very pride has need of your arms.’ 172 gravity and grace man and another, greatly reduces the part played by the Great Beast. The law does so better still. There should be no obedience except to the law or to a man. That is almost what happens in the monastic orders. The city should be built on this model. Obedience to the overlord, to a man, but a man stripped bare, adorned only with the majesty of the oath and not with a majesty borrowed from the Great Beast. A well ordered society would be one where the State only had a negative action, comparable to that of a rudder: a light pressure at the right moment to counteract the ﬁrst suggestion of any loss of equilibrium. The meaning of Plato’s Politics is that power should be in the hands of a social group composed of conquerors and conquered. But that is against nature except when the conquerors are barbarian. From this point of view the victory of barbarians over civilized peoples, when it is not destructive, is more fruitful than that of civilized peoples over barbarians. Technical development, which puts force and civilization on the same side, makes such regenerations impossible. It is accursed. Apart from such moments of fusion, the division of power between the strong and the weak is only possible through the intervention of a supernatural factor. The supernatural element in society is legitimacy in its double form: law and the assignment of supreme power. A monarchy tempered by laws could perhaps achieve the combination advocated in the Politics. But there can be no legitimacy without religion. Obedience to a man whose authority is not illuminated by legitimacy—that is a nightmare. social harmony 173 The only thing which is able to turn pure legitimacy—an idea absolutely devoid of force—into something sovereign is the thought: ‘Thus it has always been and thus it will always continue to be.’ That is why a reform should always appear, either as the return to a past which has been allowed to degenerate, or as the adaptation of an institution to new conditions, an adaptation which has as its object not a change but, on the contrary, the maintenance of an unchanging relationship. For instance, supposing there were the relationship 12/4 and 4 became 5, the real conservative would not be he who wanted 12/5, but he who made 12 into 15. The existence of a legitimate authority puts a ﬁnality into the work and actions of social life, a ﬁnality other than the thirst for one’s own advancement (the only motive recognized by liberalism). Legitimacy represents continuity in time, permanence, something unchanging. It gives as a ﬁnality to social life something which exists and which is conceived of as having always existed and as having to exist for all time. It obliges men to wish for exactly that which is. Uprooting, the break in legitimacy, when it is not due to conquest, when it is brought about in any country as a result of the abuse of lawful authority, invariably leads men to become obsessed with the idea of progress, because ﬁnality is then turned towards the future. Atheistic materialism is necessarily revolutionary, for, if it is to be directed towards an absolute good here on earth, it has to place it in the future. In order that this impetus should have full eﬀect there must therefore be a mediator between the perfection to come and the present. This mediator is the chief—Lenin, etc. 174 gravity and grace He is infallible and perfectly pure. In passing through him evil becomes good. We have either to see things in that way or to love God, or else to allow ourselves to be tossed to and fro by the little things— good and evil—of everyday life. The link between progress and the lower level (because the aims of any generation from the moment that the preceding one has come to a stop are necessarily exterior) is an example of the kinship between force and that which is low. The great mistake of the Marxists and of the whole of the nineteenth century was to think that by walking straight on one mounted upwards into the air. The supreme atheistic idea is the idea of progress, which is the negation of experimental ontological proof, for it implies that the mediocre can of itself produce the best. But all modern science combines in rejecting the idea of progress. Darwin destroyed the illusion of internal progress which was found in Lamarck. The theory of mutations only leaves chance and elimination as valid. The theory of energetics postulates that energy deteriorates and never increases, and this is applicable even to vegetable and animal life. Psychology and sociology will only become scientiﬁc through an analogous application of the notion of energy—an application incompatible with any idea of progress; then they will be resplendent with the light of true faith. The eternal alone is invulnerable to time. In order that a work of art should be admired for all time, that a love, a friendship should last throughout a life (even stay pure for an entire day, perhaps), in order that a conception of the human condition should remain constant despite the manifold experiences and social harmony 175 vicissitudes of fortune—there must be an inspiration from on high. A future which is completely impossible, like the ideal of the Spanish anarchists, degrades us far less and diﬀers far less from the eternal than a possible future. It does not even degrade us at all, except through the illusion of its possibility. If it is conceived of as impossible, it transports us into the eternal. The possible is the realm of the imagination, and thus of degradation. We must wish either for that which actually exists or for that which cannot in any way exist—or, still better, for both. That which is and that which cannot be are both outside the realm of becoming. The past, not when the imagination takes pleasure over it but at the moment when some meeting calls it up before us in its purity, is time coloured with eternity. The feeling of reality in it is pure. There we have pure joy. There we have beauty. Proust. We are attached to the present. We manufacture the future in our imagination. Only the past, when we do not remanufacture it, is pure reality. Time as it ﬂows wears down and destroys that which is temporal. Accordingly there is more of eternity in the past than in the present. The value of history properly understood is analogous to that of remembrance in Proust. Thus the past presents us with something which is at the same time real and better than ourselves, something which can draw us upwards—a thing the future never does. The past: something real, but absolutely beyond our reach, towards which we cannot take one step, towards which we can but turn ourselves so that an emanation from it may come to us. Thus it is the most perfect image of eternal, supernatural reality. 176 gravity and grace Is it for this reason that there are joy and beauty in remembrance as such? Whence will renewal come to us—to us who have deﬁled and emptied the whole earthly globe? From the past alone, if we love it. Contraries. Today we thirst for and are nauseated by totalitarianism, and nearly everyone loves one totalitarianism and hates another. Is there always identity between what we love and what we hate? Do we always feel the need to love under another form that which we hate, and vice versa? The constant illusion of Revolution consists in believing that the victims of force, being innocent of the outrages that are committed, will use force justly if it is put into their hands. But except for souls which are fairly near to saintliness, the victims are deﬁled by force just as their tormentors are. The evil which is in the handle of the sword is transmitted to its point. So the victims thus put in power and intoxicated by the change do as much harm or more, and soon sink back again to where they were before. Socialism consists in imputing good to the conquered, and racialism in imputing good to the conquerors. But the revolutionary wing of socialism makes use of those who, though lowly born, are by nature and by vocation conquerors. Thus it ends up by having the same form of ethics. Modern totalitarianism is to the Catholic totalitarianism of the twelfth century what the spirit of laïcism and freemasonry is to the humanism of the Renaissance. Humanity deteriorates at each swing of the pendulum. How far will this go? social harmony 177 After the collapse of our civilization there must be one of two things: either the whole of it will perish like the ancient civilizations, or it will adapt itself to a decentralized world. It rests with us, not to break up the centralization (for it automatically goes on increasing like a snowball until the catastrophe comes), but to prepare for the future. Our period has destroyed the interior hierarchy. How should it allow the social hierarchy, which is only a clumsy image of it, to go on existing? You could not be born at a better period than the present, when we have lost everything. THE MYSTICISM OF WORK The secret of the human condition is that there is no equilibrium between man and the surrounding forces of nature, which inﬁnitely exceed him when in inaction; there is only equilibrium in action by which man recreates his own life through work. Man’s greatness is always to recreate his life, to recreate what is given to him, to fashion that very thing which he undergoes. Through work he produces his own natural existence. Through science he recreates the universe by means of symbols. Through art he recreates the alliance between his body and his soul (cf. the speech of Eupalinos). It is to be noticed that each of these three things is something poor, empty and vain taken by itself and not in relation to the two others. Union of the three: a working people’s culture (that will not be just yet) . . . Plato himself is only a forerunner. The Greeks knew about art the mysticism of work 179 and sport, but not about work. The master is the slave of the slave in the sense that the slave makes the master. Two tasks: To individualize machinery. To individualize science (popularization, a people’s university on the Socratic model for the study of the elements of the various trades). Manual work. Why has there never been a mystic, workman or peasant, to write on the use to be made of disgust for work. Our souls ﬂy from this disgust which is so often there, ever threatening, and try to hide it from themselves by reacting vegetatively. There is mortal danger in admitting it to ourselves. This is the source of the falsehood peculiar to the working classes. (There is a falsehood peculiar to each level.) This disgust is the burdensomeness of time. To acknowledge it to ourselves without giving way under it makes us mount upwards. Disgust in all its forms is one of the most precious trials sent to man as a ladder by which to rise. I have a very large share of this favour. We have to turn all our disgust into a disgust for ourselves. Monotony is the most beautiful or the most atrocious thing. The most beautiful if it is a reﬂection of eternity—the most atrocious if it is the sign of an unvarying perpetuity. It is time surpassed or time sterilized. The circle is the symbol of monotony which is beautiful, the swinging of a pendulum of monotony which is atrocious. The spirituality of work. Work makes us experience in the most exhausting manner the phenomenon of ﬁnality rebounding like a ball; to work in order to eat, to eat in order to work. 180 gravity and grace If we regard one of the two as an end, or the one and the other taken separately, we are lost. Only the cycle contains the truth. A squirrel turning in its cage and the rotation of the celestial sphere—extreme misery and extreme grandeur. It is when man sees himself as a squirrel turning round and round in a circular cage that, if he does not lie to himself, he is close to salvation. The great hardship in manual work is that we are compelled to expend our eﬀorts for such long hours simply in order to exist. The slave is he to whom no good is proposed as the object of his labour except mere existence. Accordingly he must either be detached or fall to the vegetative level. No terrestrial ﬁnality separates the workers from God. They alone are so situated. All other conditions imply special aims which form a screen between man and pure good. But for them no such screen exists. They have nothing superﬂuous of which they have to strip themselves. To strive from necessity and not for some good—driven not drawn—in order to maintain our existence just as it is—that is always slavery. In this sense the slavery of manual workers is irreducible. Eﬀort without ﬁnality. It is terrible—or the most beautiful thing of all—if it is ﬁnality without an end. The beautiful alone enables us to be satisﬁed by that which is. Workers need poetry more than bread. They need that their life should be a poem. They need some light from eternity. Religion alone can be the source of such poetry. the mysticism of work 181 It is not religion but revolution which is the opium of the people. Deprivation of this poetry explains all forms of demoralization. Slavery is work without any light from eternity, without poetry, without religion. May the eternal light give, not a reason for living and working, but a sense of completeness which makes the search for any such reason unnecessary. Failing that, the only incentives are fear and gain—fear, which implies the oppression of the people; gain, which implies the corruption of the people. Manual labour. Time entering into the body. Through work man turns himself into matter, as Christ does through the Eucharist. Work is like a death. We have to pass through death. We have to be killed—to endure the weight of the world. When the universe is weighing upon the back of a human creature, what is there to be surprised at if it hurts him? Work is like a death if it is without an incentive. We have to act, renouncing the fruits of action. To work—if we are worn out it means that we are becoming submissive to time as matter is. Thought is forced to pass from one instant to the next without laying hold of the past or the future. That is what it means to obey. Joys parallel to fatigue: tangible joys, eating, resting, the pleasures of Sunday . . . but not money. No poetry concerning the people is authentic if fatigue does not ﬁgure in it, and the hunger and thirst which come from fatigue. P OSTSCRIPT, F IFTY Y EARS L ATER1 What could I add to these lines, written nearly half a century ago? Light for the spirit and nourishment for the soul, Simone Weil’s work does not have to be brought ‘up to date,’ since it emanates from that summit of being which overhangs all times and places. How could one put a date on a particular thought by Plato or Marcus Aurelius, a verse by Aeschylus, or the utterance of a Shakespearean hero ? The same is true, and in exemplary fashion, for Simone Weil. True light does not fade, and a true fountain need never be replenished. To speak of what is timeless is also to speak of what is universal. The undeserved privilege of presenting Simone Weil’s ﬁrst book to the public has brought me countless favourable comments from the four corners of the globe. What strikes me most about these is that they come from individuals of such diverse backgrounds, social status, cultural milieu, etc, and that 1 Thibon’s postscript in Simone Weil, La Pesanteur et la grâce (Paris: Plon, 1991) translated by Mario von der Ruhr. postscript 183 reading this work has left a deep impression on all their souls, as they found in it the revelation of an inner truth for which they had, up until then, been waiting in vain. At the twilight of a century whose accelerated history has led to the rise and fall of so many idols, this book increasingly appears like a message from eternity, addressed to eternal man, this ‘Nothingness capable of God,’ who is enslaved by gravity and liberated by grace. G T D 
‘ The best spiritual writer of this century. ’ André Gide ‘ What makes this book worth reading – and it is extremely readable – is the clarity and force of the style and the sincerity of the emotions which led Simone Weil to reflect on political philosophy… . It is a book full of interest and insight , penetrating observations and stimulating suggestions with , even in its most pessimistic passages , a humane faith and sincerity that reinforce the reader ’ s confidence in the possibility of a humanistic , rational and liberal order of society. ’ Times Literary Supplement SimoneWeil Oppression and Liberty Translated by Arthur Wills and John Petrie Oppression et liberté was first published 1955by Gallimard , Paris English edition first published 1958by Routledge & Kegan Paul First published in Routledge Classics 2001by Routledge11 New Fetter Lane , London EC4P 4EE29 West 35th Street , New York , NY 10001 Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library , 2004 . Translation © 1958 Routledge & Kegan Paul All rights reserved . No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic , mechanical , or other means , now known or hereafter invented , including photocopying and recording , or in any information storage or retrieval system , without permission in writing from the publishers . British Library Cataloguing in Publication DataA catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library ISBN 0-203-167635 Master e-book ISBN ISBN 0-203-262549 ( Adobe eReader Format ) ISBN 0–415–25560–0 ( hbk ) ISBN 0–415–25407–8 ( pbk ) ISBN 978–1–134–52181–4 ( epub ) CONTENTS Prospects : Are we Headed for the Proletarian Revolution ? Reflections Concerning Technocracy , National-Socialism , the U.S.S.R. and Certain Other Matters On Lenin ’ s book Materialism and Empiriocriticism Reflections Concerning the Causes of Liberty and Social Oppression Critique of Marxism Analysis of Oppression Theoretical Picture of a Free Society Sketch of Contemporary Social Life Conclusion Fragments , 1933–1938 Critical Examination of the Ideas of Revolution and Progress Meditation on Obedience and Liberty On the Contradictions of Marxism Fragments , London 1943 Is There a Marxist Doctrine ? PROSPECTS Are we heading for the proletarian revolution ? I would not give a farthing forthe mortal whom empty hopes canset afire . SOPHOCLES . Ajax , 477–8 The long-foreseen moment has arrived when capitalism is on the point of seeing its development arrested by impassable barriers . In whatever way we interpret the phenomenon of accumulation , it is clear that capitalism stands essentially for economic expansion and that capitalist expansion has now nearly reached the point where it will be halted by the actual limits of the earth ’ s surface . And yet never have there been fewer premonitory signs of the advent of socialism . We are in a period of transition ; but a transition towards what ? No one has the slightest idea . All the more striking , therefore , the carefree security with which we settle down in this transition period as though it were a definite stage , so much so that considerations concerning the crisis of the system have almost everywhere become commonplaces . Certainly , we can always go on believing that socialism will arrive the day after tomorrow , and make a duty or a virtue of this belief ; so long as we go on taking , day by day , the day after tomorrow to mean the next day but one after today , we shall be sure not to be disappointed ; but such a state of mind is difficult to distinguish from that of those worthy people who believe , for instance , in the Last Judgment . If we want to traverse this sombre age in manly fashion , we shall refrain , like the Ajax of Sophocles , from letting empty hopes set us afire . Throughout history men have struggled , suffered and died to free the oppressed . Their efforts , when they did not remain sterile , have never led to anything except the replacing of one oppressive régime by another . Marx , who had observed this , thought he was able to demonstrate scientifically that things were different in our day , and that the struggle of the oppressed would now lead to a true emancipation , not to a new oppression . It is this idea , which we have preserved as an article of faith , that we need to examine afresh , unless we mean systematically to close our eyes to the events of the past twenty years . Let us spare ourselves the disillusionments of those who , having fought for Liberty , Equality , Fraternity , discovered one fine day that what they had got was , as Marx says , Infantry , Cavalry , Artillery . But they at any rate were able to draw some lesson from the surprises of history ; sadder is the lot of those who perished in 1792 or 1793 , in the street or on the frontiers , fully convinced that with their lives they were purchasing the freedom of mankind . If we are to perish in the battles of the future , let us do our best to prepare ourselves to perish with a clear vision of the world we shall be leaving behind . The Paris Commune was an example not only of the creative power of the working-class masses in movement , but also of the fundamental impotence of a spontaneous movement when it comes to fighting against organized forces of repression . August 1914 marked the bankruptcy of proletarian mass organizations , both on the political and the trade-union planes , within the framework of the system . From then onwards it became necessary to abandon once and for all the hopes placed in this mode of organization not only by the reformists , but by Engels . On the other hand , October 1917 ushered in new and radiant prospects . At last the means had been found of combining legal with illegal action , the systematic labours of disciplined militants with the spontaneous seething of the masses . All over the world communist parties were to be formed to which the Bolshevik party would pass on its knowledge and technique ; they were to replace social democracy , already described by Rosa Luxemburg , in August 1914 , as a “ stinking corpse ” , and very soon to disappear from the stage of history ; and they were to seize power within a very short time . The political régime set up spontaneously by the workers of Paris in 1871 , then by those of St. Petersburg in 1905 , was to become solidly entrenched in Russia and so on to embrace the entire civilized world . Of course , the crushing of the Russian Revolution by the brutal intervention of foreign imperialism might blast these brilliant prospects ; but , unless such a thing occurred , Lenin and Trotsky were certain of introducing into history precisely this particular series of transformations and not any other . Fifteen years have elapsed . The Russian Revolution has not been crushed . Its enemies , both abroad and at home , have been vanquished . And yet nowhere on the surface of the globe—including Russia—are there any soviets ; nowhere on the surface of the globe—including Russia—is there any communist party properly so called . The “ stinking corpse ” of social democracy has continued for fifteen years to infect the political atmosphere , which is hardly the action of a corpse ; if at last it has largely been swept away , this has been the work of fascism , not of the Revolution . The régime born of October , which had either to expand or perish , has for fifteen years accommodated itself very well to the boundaries set by its national frontiers ; its role abroad now consists , as events in Germany clearly demonstrate , in stifling the revolutionary activities of the proletariat . The reactionary bourgeoisie have at last perceived that it has very nearly lost all force of expansion , and are wondering whether they could not now make use of it by arranging defensive and offensive alliances with it with a view to future wars ( cf . the Deutsche Allgemeine Zeitung for 27th May ) . The truth is that this régime resembles that which Lenin thought he was setting up in so far as it excludes capitalist property almost entirely ; in every other respect it is the exact opposite . Instead of genuine freedom of the press , there is the impossibility of expressing a free opinion , whether in the form of a printed , typewritten or hand-written document , or simply by word of mouth , without running the risk of being deported ; instead of the free play between parties within the framework of the soviet system , there is the cry of “ one party in power , and all the rest in prison ” ; instead of a communist party destined to rally together , for the purposes of free co-operation , men possessing the highest degree of devotion , conscientiousness , culture , and critical aptitude , there is a mere administrative machine , a passive instrument in the hands of the Secretariat , which , as Trotsky himself admits , is a party only in name ; instead of soviets , unions and co-operatives functioning democratically and directing the economic and political life of the country , there are organizations bearing , it is true , the same names , but reduced to mere administrative mechanisms ; instead of the people armed and organized as a militia to ensure by itself alone defence abroad and order at home , there is a standing army , and a police force freed from control and a hundred times better armed than that of the Tsar ; lastly , and above all , instead of elected officials , permanently subject to control and dismissal , who were to ensure the functioning of government until such time as “ every cook would learn how to rule the State ” , there is a professional bureaucracy , freed from responsibility , recruited by cooption and possessing , through the concentration in its hands of all economic and political power , a strength hitherto unknown in the annals of history . The very novelty of such a régime makes it difficult to analyse . Trotsky persists in saying that we have here a “ dictatorship of the proletariat ” , a “ workers ’ State ” , albeit with “ bureaucratic deformations ” , and that , as regards the necessity for such a régime to expand or perish , Lenin and he were mistaken only over the time-scale . But when an error in degree attains such proportions we may be permitted to think that an error in kind is involved , in other words a mistake touching the actual nature of the régime of whose conditions of existence a definition is being attempted . Besides , to call a State a “ workers ’ State ” when you go on to explain that each worker in it is put economically and politically at the complete disposal of a bureaucratic caste , sounds like a bad joke . As for the “ deformations ” , this term , singularly out of place in the case of a State all of whose characteristics are exactly the reverse of those theoretically associated with a workers ’ State , seems to imply that the Stalin régime is a sort of anomaly or disease of the Russian Revolution . But the distinction between the pathological and the normal has no theoretical validity . Descartes used to say that a clock out of order is not an exception to the laws governing clocks , but a different mechanism obeying its own laws ; in the same way we should regard the Stalin régime , not as a workers ’ State out of order , but as a different social mechanism , whose definition is to be found in the wheels of which it is composed and which functions according to the nature of those wheels . And , whereas the wheels of a workers ’ State would consist of the democratic institutions of the working class , those of the Stalin régime consist exclusively of the various parts of a centralized administrative system on which the whole economic , political and intellectual life of the country is entirely dependent . For such a régime , the dilemma “ expand or perish ” not only is no longer valid , but no longer even has any meaning ; the Stalin régime , considered as a system of oppression , is no whit more contagious than was the French Empire for France ’ s neighbours . The view according to which the Stalin régime constitutes a mere transition , either in the direction of socialism or in that of capitalism , also seems arbitrary . The oppression of the workers is evidently not a step in the direction of socialism . The “ bureaucratic and military machine ” which constituted , in Marx ’ s eyes , the real obstacle in the way of a continuous march towards socialism through the simple accumulation of successive reforms , has no doubt not lost this property , seeing that contrary to what was foreseen , it has survived the capitalist economy . As for the restoration of capitalism , which could only take place as a sort of colonization , this is not at all impossible , in view of the greed that characterizes all imperialisms and of the economic and military weakness of the U.S.S.R. ; however , the rivalries between the various imperialisms have , so far , prevented the ratio of forces from being overpoweringly against Russia . At all events , the Soviet bureaucracy is in no sense tending towards a renunciation of its powers , so that the term “ transitional ” would in any case be wrong . There is nothing which entitles us to assert that the Russian State bureaucracy is preparing the ground for any domination other than its own , whether that of the proletariat or that of the bourgeoisie . Actually , all the embarrassed explanations by which the militants trained under Bolshevism try to escape from having to recognize the fundamental falsity of the prospects advanced in October 1917 are based on the same preconceived notion as were those prospects themselves , namely , on the assertion , regarded as a dogma , that there can at the present time be only two types of State , the capitalist State and the workers ’ State . This dogma is brutally denied by the development of the régime deriving from the October Revolution . No workers ’ State has ever yet existed on the earth ’ s surface , except for a few weeks in Paris in 1871 , and perhaps for a few months in Russia in 1917 and 1918 . On the other hand , for nearly fifteen years now , over one-sixth of the globe , there has reigned a State as oppressive as any other which is neither a capitalist nor a workers ’ State . Certainly , Marx never foresaw anything of this kind . But not even Marx is more precious to us than the truth . The other outstanding phenomenon of our time , that is to say fascism , fits no more easily into the categories of classical Marxism than does the Russian State . On this subject , too , of course , there are clichés serving as an escape from the painful obligation of having to think . Just as the U.S.S.R. is a “ workers ’ State ” more or less “ deformed ” , so fascism is a movement of the lower-middle classes , based on demagogy , and constitutes “ the bourgeoisie ’ s last card before the triumph of the Revolution ” . For the degeneration of the workers ’ movement has led the theorists to represent the class struggle as a duel , or a game between actively conscious partners , and each social or political event as a manoeuvre by one of these partners—a conception that has no more to do with materialism than has Greek mythology . There exist small groups of high financiers , big industrialists and reactionary politicians who consciously defend what they take to be the political interests of the capitalist oligarchy ; but they are as incapable of preventing as they are of arousing a mass movement like fascism , or even of directing it . In point of fact , they have at times assisted it , at times fought against it ; they have tried vainly to turn it into a docile instrument and have ended by surrendering to it . Certainly it is the presence of an exasperated proletariat which , for them , makes this surrender a lesser evil . Nevertheless , fascism is something altogether different from a card in their hands . The brutal manner in which Hitler dismissed Hugenberg , as if he were a domestic servant , in spite of Krupp ’ s protests , is significant in this respect . Nor must it be forgotten that fascism definitely puts an end to that interplay of parties born of the bourgeois régime which no bourgeois dictatorship , even in time of war , had ever yet suppressed ; and that it has installed in its place a political régime more or less the same in structure as that of the Russian régime as defined by Tomsky : “ One party in power and all the rest in prison. ” We may add that the mechanical subordination of the party to the leader is the same in each case , and guaranteed in each case by the police . But political sovereignty is nothing without economic sovereignty ; which is why fascism tends to approach the Russian régime on the economic plane also , by concentrating all power , economic as well as political , in the hands of the Head of the State . Here , however , fascism comes up against capitalist property , which it has no intention of destroying . There lies a contradiction whose outcome it is difficult to foresee . But just as the mechanism of the Russian State can not be explained merely by “ deformations ” , so this fundamental contradiction in the fascist movement can not be explained merely by demagogy . What is certain is that , whereas Italian fascism only attained to the concentration of political power after many long years which exhausted its impetus , national-socialism , which reached the same result in less than six months , still contains immense reserves of energy , and tends to go very much farther . As a report issued by an important German concern clearly shows—L ’ Humanité quoted it without perceiving its significance—the bourgeoisie is alarmed at the threat of State control , and , indeed , Hitler has set up State organs with sovereign power to condemn workers or owners to ten years ’ hard labour and to confiscate businesses . Vain efforts are made , in the attempt to bring national-socialism at all costs within the Marxist framework , to find at the heart of the movement a disguised form of the class struggle , between the instinctively socialist rank and file and the leaders standing for the interests of big business whose aim is to hoodwink the masses by skilful demagogy . To begin with , nothing entitles us to declare with certainty that Hitler and his lieutenants , whatever their ties with monopolistic capitalism , are mere instruments in its hands . And then , above all , the orientation of the Hitlerite masses , though violently anti-capitalist , is by no means socialist , any more so than the demagogic propaganda of the leaders ; for the object is to place the national economy , not in the hands of the producers grouped into democratic organizations , but in the hands of the State apparatus . Now , although it is a long time since the influence of the reformists and the Stalinists made us forget the fact , socialism is the economic sovereignty of the workers and not of the bureaucratic and military machine of the State . What is called the “ national-Bolshevik ” wing of the Hitler movement is therefore in no sense socialist . It follows that the two political phenomena which dominate our time can neither of them find a place in the traditional picture of the class struggle . The same applies to a whole series of contemporary movements springing from the post-war period and remarkable for their affinity with both Stalinism and fascism . Such , for example , is the German review Die Tat , which groups together a band of young and brilliant economists , is extremely close to national-socialism , and regards the U.S.S.R. as the model for the future State , save in the matter of the abolition of private property ; it is at present advocating a military alliance between Russia and Hitlerite Germany . In France , we have a few groups , such as that of the review Plans , in which a like ambiguity is found . But the most significant movement of this kind is that technocratic movement which is said in a short space of time to have spread over the whole of the United States . We know that it advocates , within the limits of a closed national economy , the abolition of competition and markets and an economic dictatorship exercised in sovereign fashion by technicians . This movement , which has often been compared to Stalinism and fascism , has all the greater scope in that it appears to be not without influence over the group of intellectuals at Columbia who are at present advising Roosevelt . Such ideological trends are something absolutely new , giving its own character to our time . For the rest , the present period , however confused and rich in political trends of all kinds , new and old , seems to lack only that very movement which , according to the forecasts , was to constitute its essential feature , namely , the struggle for the economic and political emancipation of the workers . There are , to be sure , scattered here and there and divided by obscure quarrels , a handful of old-time trade unionists and sincere communists ; there are even a few small organizations that have preserved wellnigh intact the socialist watchwords . But the ideal of a society governed in the economic and political sphere by co-operation between the workers now inspires scarcely a single mass movement , whether spontaneous or organized ; and that at the very moment when , on every hand , there is nothing but talk of the bankruptcy of capitalism . Faced with this state of things , we are obliged , if we wish to look reality in the face , to ask ourselves whether that which is to take the place of capitalism is not to be a new system of oppression , instead of the free association of producers . I should like in this connection to submit an idea , purely as a hypothesis , for examination by the comrades . We can say , to put it briefly , that up to the present mankind has known two principal forms of oppression , the one ( slavery or serfdom ) exercised in the name of armed force , the other in the name of wealth thus transformed into capital ; what we have to determine is whether these are not now being succeeded by a new species of oppression , oppression exercised in the name of management . The mere reading of Marx clearly shows that already , half a century ago , capitalism had undergone profound changes of a nature to transform the very mechanism of oppression . This transformation has become more and more pronounced between Marx ’ s death and the present time , and at a particularly accelerated tempo during the postwar years . We already see in Marx that the phenomenon which makes capitalism what it is , namely , the buying and selling of man-power , has become , in the course of the development of big industry , a subordinate factor in the oppression of the working masses ; the decisive moment , so far as the worker ’ s reduction to slavery is concerned , is no longer the moment when , on the labour market , he sells his time to the boss , but the moment when , having scarcely crossed the threshold of the factory , he is swallowed up by the undertaking . We know Marx ’ s terrible utterances on this subject : “ In craftsmanship and fabrication by hand , the worker makes use of the tool ; in the factory , he is at the service of the machine. ” “ In the factory there exists a dead mechanism , independent of the workers , which incorporates them as living cogs. ” “ It is only with mechanization that the inversion [ of the relationship between the worker and the conditions of work ] becomes a reality that can be grasped in the technique itself. ” “ The separation of the spiritual forces of the process of production from manual work , and the transformation of the former into forces of oppression exercised by capital over labour , is fully accomplished … in large-scale industry built up on the basis of mechanisation . The detail of the individual destiny … of the worker working at the machine disappears like some squalid trifle before the knowledge , the tremendous natural forces and the collective labour which are crystallized in the machine system and go to make up the owner ’ s power. ” If we leave out hand-fabrication , which can be regarded as a mere transition , we may say that the oppression of the wage-earners , based , to begin with , essentially on the relationship between property and exchange in the days of small workshops , has become , with the advent of mechanization , a mere aspect of the relationships involved in the very technique of production . To the conflict set up by money between buyers and sellers of labour has been added another conflict , set up by the very means of production , between those who have the machine at their disposal and those who are at the disposal of the machine . The Russian experiment has shown that , contrary to what Marx too readily assumed , the first of these conflicts can be eliminated without entailing the disappearance of the second . In capitalist countries , both conflicts coexist , and this coexistence gives rise to considerable confusion . The same men sell themselves to capital and serve the machine ; on the other hand , it is not always the same men who own the capital and run the business . As a matter of fact , there was still , not so long ago , a class of workmen who , although wage-earners , were not simply living cogs in the service of the machines , but on the contrary carried out their work while using machines with as much freedom , initiative and intelligence as the craftsmen who wields his tool ; these were the skilled workmen . This class of workmen , which , in each industrial concern , constituted the essential factor in production , has been more or less swept away by rationalization . Nowadays , a machine-setter has the job of setting a certain number of machines according to the requirements of the work to be carried out , and the work is accomplished under his orders by specialized hands able to handle one type of machine , and one only , always using identical movements , in which intelligence plays no part . Thus a factory is at present divided into two clearly separated camps—those who execute the work without , strictly speaking , taking any active part in it , and those who direct the work without executing anything . Between these two groups composing the personnel of an industrial concern , the machine itself forms an impassable barrier . At the same time , the development of the system of limited companies has created a barrier—less precise , it is true—between those who manage the business and those who own it . A man like Ford , who is both a capitalist and the managing director of a business , nowadays seems to us a survival from the past , as the American economist Pound has remarked . “ Industrial concerns ” , writes Palewski in a book published in 1928 , “ tend more and more to get out of the hands of those captains of industry who were the original owner-managers of the business… . The age of the tycoons tends more and more to become a thing of the past . We are entering a period that has been called the age of the technicians of management , and these technicians are as far removed from the engineers and the capitalists as are the workmen . The head is no longer a capitalist who owns the business ; he has been replaced by a board of technicians . We still live on that past which is so close to us , and the mind has a certain difficulty in grasping this development. ” Here again we are dealing with a phenomenon which Marx had already perceived . But , whereas in Marx ’ s time the managing staff of the undertaking was hardly more than a team of employees at the service of the capitalists , nowadays , vis-à-vis the small shareholders reduced to the role of mere parasites and the big capitalists mainly concerned with financial manipulations , the “ technicians of management ” form a distinct social stratum whose importance tends to increase and which absorbs in various ways a considerable proportion of the profits . Laurat , in his book on the U.S.S.R. , analysing the mechanism of the exploitation exercised by the bureaucracy , remarks that “ the personal consumption of the bureaucrats ” —a consumption disproportionate , generally speaking , to the value of the services rendered by them— “ effected regularly and as a fixed charge ” operates almost independently of capital reserve requirements which figure under the heading “ profits ” only after “ running costs ” , that is to say the needs of the bureaucracy , have been covered ; and he compares this system to the capitalist system under which “ capital reserve requirements come before the payment of dividends ” . But he forgets that , although capital reserves come before dividends , the “ running costs ” in capitalist countries , exactly as in the U.S.S.R. , come before the placing to capital reserve . Never has this phenomenon been as striking as today , when undertakings on the verge of bankruptcy , having sacked a host of workmen and working at a third or a quarter of their productive capacity , preserve almost intact a managerial staff composed of a few directors drawing fat fees and clerks who are ill-paid , but whose numbers are out of all proportion to the rate of production . Consequently , there are grouped round the undertaking three quite distinct social strata—the workers , passive instruments of the undertaking , the capitalists whose authority rests on an economic system in process of decay , and the managing personnel who rely , on the contrary , on a technique whose development only keeps on increasing their power . This rise of the bureaucratic element in industry is only the most characteristic aspect of an altogether general phenomenon . The essential thing about this phenomenon is a specialization increasing from day to day . The transformation that has taken place in industry , where skilled workmen capable of understanding and handling many types of machine have been replaced by specialized unskilled hands automatically trained to serve one type of machine only , is the image of a development which has occurred in every field . If the workers are becoming more and more lacking in technical knowledge , the technicians are not only often pretty ignorant of working practice , but furthermore their proficiency is in many cases limited to a quite restricted field ; in America , they have even set about producing specialized engineers—just like ordinary unskilled men—in a certain category of machines , and , what is significant , the U.S.S.R. has hastened to copy America in this respect . Moreover , it goes without saying that the technicians are ignorant of the theoretical basis of the knowledge which they employ . The scientists , in their turn , not only remain out of touch with technical problems , but are furthermore entirely deprived of that general view of things which is the very essence of theoretical culture . One could count on one ’ s fingers the number of scientists throughout the world with a general idea of the history and development of their particular science : there is none who is really competent as regards sciences other than his own . As science forms an indivisible whole , one may say that there are no longer , strictly speaking , scientists , but only unskilled hands doing scientific work , cogs in a whole their minds are quite incapable of embracing . Examples could be multiplied . In almost all fields , the individual , shut in within the bounds of a limited proficiency , finds himself caught up in a whole which is beyond him , by which he must regulate all his activity , and whose functioning he is unable to understand . In such a situation , there is one function which takes on a supreme importance , namely , that which consists simply in co-ordinating ; we may call it the administrative or bureaucratic function . The speed with which bureaucracy has invaded almost every branch of human activity is something astounding once one thinks about it . The rationalized factory , where a man finds himself shorn , in the interests of a passive mechanism , of everything which makes for initiative , intelligence , knowledge , method , is as it were an image of our present-day society . For the bureaucratic machine , though composed of flesh , and of well-fed flesh at that , is none the less as irresponsible and as soulless as are machines made of iron and steel . The whole evolution of present-day society tends to develop the various forms of bureaucratic oppression and to give them a sort of autonomy in regard to capitalism as such . That is why it is our duty to define this new political factor more clearly than Marx was able to do . As a matter of fact , Marx had perceived the force of oppression constituted by bureaucracy . He had seen perfectly well that the true obstacle to emancipatory reforms is not the system of exchange and of property , but “ the bureaucratic and military machine ” of the State . He had quite understood that the most disgraceful blot to be wiped out by socialism is not wage-earning , but “ the degrading division between manual and intellectual work ” , or , according to another formula , “ the separation of the spiritual forces of labour from manual labour ” . But Marx did not ask himself whether this was not a case of an order of problems independent of the problems presented by the operation of the capitalist economy properly so called . Although he had witnessed the division between property and management in capitalist enterprise , he did not ask himself whether the administrative function , in so far as it is permanent , might not , independently of all monopoly over property , give rise to a new class of oppressors . And yet , though one can see very well how a revolution can “ expropriate the expropriators ” , one can not see how a method of production founded on the subordination of those who do the work to those who co-ordinate could do otherwise than produce automatically a social structure of which the distinguishing mark is the dictatorship of a bureaucratic caste . Not but what one can imagine a control and a system of rotation whereby equality in the State as well as in the actual process of industrial production could be restored ; but , in point of fact , when a social stratum finds that it has any kind of monopoly in its hands , it preserves that monopoly until the very foundations on which it rests have been undermined by the historical process . It was in this way that feudalism fell , not through the pressure of the lower orders themselves taking possession of armed force , but by the substitution of trade for war as the principal means of domination . In the same way , the social stratum of which the mark is the exercise of administrative functions will never consent , whatever the legal system of property may be , to allow the working masses access to those functions , to teach “ every cook how to rule the State ” , or every unskilled worker how to run the business . Every system characterized by the domination of one class over another in effect corresponds , historically , to the distinction between one dominant social function and one or several subordinate functions . Thus , in the Middle Ages , production was something subordinate as compared to the defence of the fields by armed force ; at the next stage , production , having become essentially industrialized , found itself subordinated to distribution . Socialism will exist when the dominant function is productive labour itself ; but this can not happen as long as a system of production continues in which labour as such finds itself subordinated , by means of the machine , to the function consisting in co-ordination of labour . No expropriation can solve this problem , against which the heroism of the Russian workers was shattered . Abolishing the division of men into capitalists and proletarians does not in the least imply that “ the separation of the spiritual forces of labour from manual labour ” must disappear , even progressively . The American technocrats have drawn an enchanting picture of a society in which , with the abolition of the market , technicians would find themselves all-powerful , and would use their power in such a way as to give to all the maximum leisure and comfort possible . This idea reminds us , by its utopianism , of that of enlightened despotism which our forefathers cherished . All exclusive , uncontrolled power becomes oppressive in the hands of those who have the monopoly of it . And we can already see very clearly how , within the capitalist system itself , the oppressive action of this new social stratum is taking shape . In the field of production , the bureaucracy , an irresponsible mechanism , brings about , as Laurat has observed in connection with the U.S.S.R. , on the one hand an unlimited parasitism , and on the other an anarchy which , in spite of all the “ plans ” , is at least equal to that occasioned by capitalist competition . As for the relationships between production and consumption , it would be useless to hope that a bureaucratic caste , whether Russian or American , would restore them by subordinating the first to the second . Every human group that exercises power does so , not in such a way as to bring happiness to those who are subject to it , but in such a way as to increase that power ; it is a matter of life and death for any form of domination whatsoever . As long as production remained at a primitive stage of development , the question of power was decided by armed force . Economic changes transferred it to the plane of production itself ; it was in this way that the capitalist system came into being . The development of the system later restored war as an essential means in the struggle for power , but under a different form ; superiority in the armed struggle presupposes , nowadays , superiority in production itself . If the free play of competition is the final object of production in the hands of the capitalists , its final object in the hands of technicians organized into a State bureaucracy would necessarily be preparation for war . Besides , as Rousseau had already understood , no system of oppression is interested in the welfare of the oppressed ; it is on their miserable condition that oppression can rest the more easily the whole of its weight . As for the moral atmosphere that a régime of bureaucratic dictatorship can bring about , we can realize here and now what it can be like . Capitalism is only a system for exploiting productive work ; if we leave out the proletariat ’ s efforts at emancipation , it has given full scope , in every branch of activity , to initiative , free enquiry , invention and genius . On the other hand , the bureaucratic machine , which excludes all judgment and all genius , tends , by its very structure , to concentrate all powers in itself . It therefore threatens the very existence of everything that still remains precious for us in the bourgeois régime . Instead of the clash of contrary opinions , we should have , on all subjects , an official opinion from which no one would be able to deviate ; instead of the cynicism characteristic of the capitalist system , which severs all bonds between man and man in order to replace them by mere relationships of interest , a carefully cultivated fanaticism , calculated to make poverty , in the eyes of the masses , no longer a burden passively to be borne , but a sacrifice freely consented to ; a mixture of mystical devotion and unbridled bestiality ; a State religion that would stifle all individual values , that is to say all real values . The capitalist system , and even the feudal system , which , through the disorder which it involved , allowed here and there individuals and collectivities to develop in an independent manner , not to mention that blissful Greek system under which the slaves were at least employed in seeing to the wants of free men—all these forms of oppression appear as forms of a free and happy existence when compared with a system that would methodically destroy all initiative , all culture , all thought . Are we really threatened with subjection to such a system ? We are perhaps more than threatened with it ; it seems as though we could see it taking shape before our eyes . War , which perpetuates itself under the form of preparation for war , has once and for all given the State an important role in production . Despite the fact that , even in the very heat of the struggle , the capitalists ’ interests have often come before those of national defence—as the example of Briey shows—systematic preparation for war presupposes in the case of each State a certain regimentation of the economy , a certain tendency towards economic independence . On the other hand , in all spheres , bureaucracy has , since the war , increased in monstrous fashion . Certainly , bureaucracy has not yet turned itself into a system of oppression ; if it has crept in everywhere , it nevertheless remains diffused , scattered about in a host of administrative organs which the free play itself of the capitalist system prevents from crystallizing around some central nucleus . Fried , the principal theorist of the review Die Tat , said in 1930 : “ We are practically speaking under the domination of the trade-union bureaucracy , the industrial bureaucracy and the State bureaucracy , and these three bureaucracies are so alike that any one of them could be put in place of another. ” Now , under the influence of the crisis , these three bureaucracies are tending to merge into one single organization . It is what we see in America , where Roosevelt , under the influence of a band of technicians , is trying to fix prices and wages in agreement with the industrialists ’ associations and the trade unions . It is what we see in Germany , where , with lightning rapidity , the State apparatus has taken over the trade-union apparatus and is tending to lay its hands on the economy . As for Russia , the three bureaucracies—State , capital industries and workers ’ organizations—have long since constituted one and the same apparatus . The question of the prospects lying ahead thus presents itself in two ways . On the one hand , in the case of Russia , where the working masses have expropriated owners and capitalists , the question is whether , without a civil war , the bureaucracy can wipe out the last vestiges of the conquests of October . It certainly seems as though we are compelled by the facts , in spite of Trotsky , to reply in the affirmative . As for other countries , we must consider whether in them capitalism as such can be destroyed without a similar expropriation , through a simple transformation in the meaning of property . On this point , the facts are far less clear . One can certainly say that already the capitalist system , strictly speaking , no longer exists . There is no longer , strictly speaking , a labour market . Regulation of wages and of engagement of labour , the labour corps , seem to be so many steps in the transformation of the wage-earning system into a new form of exploitation . It seems also that in Germany the commissioners placed by Hitler in the trusts and the big undertakings do , in fact , exercise dictatorial powers . The systematic abandonment of gold currency throughout the world is also an important phenomenon . Furthermore , we must bear in mind such facts as the “ conclusion of the national revolution ” in Germany and the setting up of a supreme economic council which includes all the industrial magnates . Nevertheless , the national-socialist movement is far from having shot its last bolt . The successive acts of surrender made by the bourgeoisie to this movement show well enough what the true relationship between the forces is . The way ownership and industrial management have become separated , which has transformed the majority of owners of capital into mere parasites , permits the use of slogans such as “ the struggle against the servitude of interest ” , which are anti-capitalist without being proletarian . As for the big industrial and financial magnates , their participation in the economic dictatorship of the State does not necessarily exclude the suppression of the part hitherto played by them in the economy . Finally , if political factors may be taken as signs of economic evolution , one can not disregard the fact that all the political currents which now affect the masses , whether they style themselves fascist , socialist or communist , tend towards the same form of State capitalism . Only a few defenders of economic liberalism oppose this powerful tendency , but they become more and more timid and are less and less listened to . Few indeed are those among our comrades who remember that the workers ’ democracy could also be set against it . With all these facts , and many others before us , we are obliged to ask ourselves frankly towards what kind of system the present crisis will lead us , if it continues , or , in the event of a rapid return to a favourable situation , the crises to come . In face of a development of this kind , the worst lapse would be for ourselves to forget the goal we are aiming at . Already a great number of our comrades are more or less seriously infected by this lapse , and it threatens us all . Let us not forget that we want to make the individual , and not the collectivity , the supreme value . We want to form whole men by doing away with that specialization which cripples us all . We want to give to manual labour that dignity which belongs to it of right , by giving the workman the full understanding of technical processes instead of a mere mechanical training ; and to provide the understanding with its proper object , by placing it in contact with the world through the medium of labour . We want to make abundantly clear the true relationships between man and nature—those relationships that are concealed , in every society based on exploitation , by “ the degrading division of labour into intellectual and manual labour ” . We want to give back to man , that is to say to the individual , the power which it is his proper function to exercise over nature , over tools , over society itself ; to re-establish the importance of the workers as compared with material conditions of work ; and , instead of doing away with private property , “ to turn individual property into something real , by transforming the means of production … which at present serve above all to enslave and exploit labour , into mere instruments of labour freely and co-operatively performed ” . That is the proper task of our generation . For several centuries now , ever since the Renaissance , men of thought and men of action have laboured methodically to give the human mind mastery over the forces of nature ; and their success has surpassed all expectations . But during the last century it came to be realized that society itself is a force of nature , as blind as the others , as dangerous for man if he does not succeed in mastering it . At the present time this force weighs upon us more cruelly than water , earth , air and fire ; all the more so since it holds in its own grasp , as a result of technical progress , the control of water , earth , air and fire . The individual has found himself brutally deprived of the means of combat and of labour ; neither war nor production is any longer possible without a total subordination of the individual to the collective industrial machine . Now the social mechanism , through its blind functioning , is in process—as everying that has happened since August 1914 shows—of destroying all the conditions for the material and moral well-being of the individual , all the conditions for intellectual and cultural development . To gain mastery over this mechanism is for us a matter of life and death ; and to gain mastery over it means to subject it to the human mind , that is to the individual . In the subordination of society to the individual lies the definition of true democracy and that of socialism as well . But how are we to master this blind force , when it possesses , as Marx has shown in striking phrases , all the intellectual and moral forces crystallized in one monstrous machine ? We should look in vain in Marxist literature for a reply to this question . Are we , then , to despair ? Certainly , we would not lack reasons for doing so . It is difficult to see wherein one could place one ’ s hopes . The ability to judge freely is becoming rarer and rarer , more especially in intellectual circles , owing to that specialization which forces each one of us , in the fundamental questions raised by each theoretical piece of research , to believe without understanding . Thus , even in the domain of pure theory , individual judgment finds itself invalidated in face of the results arrived at by collective effort . As for the working class , its position as a passive instrument of production hardly prepares it for taking its own destiny into its hands . The present generations were first of all decimated and demoralized by the war ; then peace and prosperity , once restored , brought with them on the one hand a display of wealth and a fever for speculation which have deeply corrupted all classes of the population , and on the other hand technical changes which have deprived the working class of its main strength . For the hope of the revolutionary movement rested on the skilled workmen , the only ones who combined thought and action in industrial work , or who took an active and vital part in the carrying on of the undertaking ; the only ones capable of feeling themselves ready to take over one day the responsibility for the whole of economic and political life . Indeed , they formed the most solid nucleus of the revolutionary organizations . And now rationalization has done away with their function and has barely left more than specialized unskilled workmen , completely enslaved to the machine . Then came unemployment , which descended upon the working class thus crippled without producing any reaction . If it has exterminated fewer men than did the war , it has brought about a far more profound demoralization , by reducing great masses of workers , and in particular the whole of the younger generation , to a parasitic condition which , through being prolonged , has come in the end to seem permanent to those who are its victims . The workers who have remained in the factories have at length come themselves to consider the work they do , no longer as an activity indispensible to production , but as a favour granted them by the undertaking . Thus unemployment , where it is most widespread , ends up by reducing the proletariat as a whole to a parasitic frame of mind . It is true that prosperity may return , but no prosperity can now save those generations that have spent their adolescence and youth in a state of idleness more exhausting than work itself , or preserve the coming generations from another crisis or another war . Can the workers ’ organizations give the proletariat the strength it lacks ? The very complexity of the capitalist system , and consequently of the problems that the struggle to be waged against it raises , carries into the very heart of the working-class movement “ the degrading division of labour into manual and intellectual labour ” . Spontaneous struggle has always proved itself to be ineffective , and organized action almost automatically secretes an administrative apparatus which , sooner or later , becomes oppressive . Nowadays , such oppression is accomplished in the form of an organic liaison either with the national State apparatus or with the Russian State apparatus . Consequently , our efforts run the risk not only of remaining ineffectual , but also of turning themselves against us , to the advantage of our arch-enemy , fascism . The work of agitation , by fanning revolt to white heat , can serve the cause of fascist demagogy , as the example of the German communist party shows . The work of organization , by fostering bureaucracy , can also promote the advent of fascism , as the example of social-democracy shows . Militants can not take the place of the working class . The emancipation of the workers will be carried out by the workers themselves , or it will not take place at all . Now the most tragic fact of the present time is that the industrial crisis affects the proletariat more profoundly than it does the capitalist class , so that it seems to be not merely the crisis of a system , but of our society itself . These views will no doubt be taxed with defeatism , even by comrades who endeavour to see clearly . It is doubtful , however , whether we gain anything by using in our ranks the vocabulary of the general staff . With us the very word discouragement ought to have no meaning . The only question that arises is whether we should or should not continue the struggle ; if the former , then we shall struggle with as much enthusiasm as if victory were assured . There is no difficulty whatever , once one has decided to act , in maintaining intact , on the level of action , those very hopes which a critical examination has shown to be wellnigh unfounded ; in that lies the very essence of courage . Now , seeing that a defeat would run the risk of destroying , for an indefinite period , everything which lends value to human life in our eyes , it is obvious that we must struggle by every means which seems to us to have some chance of proving effective . A man who is thrown overboard in the middle of the ocean ought not to let himself drown , even though there is very little chance of his reaching safety , but to go on swimming until exhausted . And we are not really without hope . The mere fact that we exist , that we conceive and want something different from what exists , constitutes for us a reason for hoping . The working class still contains , scattered here and there , to a large extent outside organized labour , an élite of workers , inspired by that force of mind and spirit that is found only among the proletariat , ready , if need be , to devote themselves wholeheartedly , with the resolution and conscientiousness that a good workman puts into his work , to the building of a rational society . If circumstances are propitious , a spontaneous movement of the masses can carry them to the front of the stage of history . In the meantime , one can only help them to prepare themselves , to think things out , to acquire influence in the workers ’ organizations that still remain living , that is to say , in the case of France , in the unions , and lastly to band together for the purpose of carrying out , in the streets or in the factories , such actions as are still possible in spite of the present apathy of the masses . An effort tending towards the grouping together of all that has remained healthy at the very heart of industrial undertakings , avoiding both the stirring up of primitive feelings of revolt and the crystallization of an administrative apparatus , may not be much , but there is nothing else . The only hope of socialism resides in those who have already brought about in themselves , as far as is possible in the society of today , that union between manual and intellectual labour which characterizes the society we are aiming at . But , in addition to this task , the extreme inadequacy of the arms we have at our disposal compels us to undertake another . If , as is only too possible , we are to perish , let us see to it that we do not perish without having existed . The powerful forces that we have to fight are preparing to crush us ; and it is true that they can prevent us from existing fully , that is to say from stamping the world with the seal of our will . But there is one sphere in which they are powerless . They can not stop us from working towards a clear comprehension of the object of our efforts , so that , if we can not accomplish that which we will , we may at least have willed it , and not just have blindly wished for it ; and , on the other hand , our weakness may indeed prevent us from winning , but not from comprehending the force by which we are crushed . Nothing in the world can prevent us from thinking clearly . There is no contradiction whatever between this task of theoretical elucidation and the tasks set by the actual struggle ; on the contrary , there is a correlation , since one can not act without knowing what one intends and what obstacles have to be overcome . Nevertheless , since the time at our disposal is in any case limited , we are forced to divide it between thought and action , or , to talk more modestly , preparation for action . It is not by any set rule that this division can be determined , but only by the temperament , turn of mind and natural gifts of each one , by the conjectures each one forms about the future , by the chance play of circumstances . At all events , the greatest calamity that could befall us would be to perish incapable both of winning and of understanding . ( Revolution prolétarienne , No.158 , 25th August , 1933 . ) REFLECTIONS CONCERNINGTECHNOCRACY , NATIONAL-SOCIALISM , THE U.S.S.R. ANDCERTAIN OTHER MATTERS Here are a few ideas , adventurous perhaps , certainly heretical , as compared with all the accepted orthodoxies , designed above all to make militants think . We are living on a doctrine elaborated by a great man certainly , but a great man who died fifty years ago . He created a method ; he applied it to the phenomena of his time ; he could not apply it to the phenomena of our own time . Pre-war militants felt the need to apply the Marxist method to the new form capitalism had assumed in their day . Lenin ’ s slender brochure on imperialism points to such a concern , for which the day-to-day preoccupations of militants left unfortunately little leisure . As for ourselves , Marx represents for us , at best , a doctrine ; far more often just a name that one hurls at the head of an opponent to pulverize him ; almost never a method . Marxism can not , however , remain something living except as a method of analysis , of which each generation makes use to define the essential phenomena of its own period . Now , it seems that our bodies alone are living in this prodigiously new period , which belies all previous forecasts , and that our minds continue to move , if not at the time of the first International , at any rate in the prewar period , at the time of the revolutionary C.G.T1 and the Russian Bolshevik party . No one tries to define the present period . Trotsky has certainly said , and even repeated on several occasions , that , since 1914 , capitalism has entered upon a new phase , that of its decline ; but he has never found the time to say what he means by that exactly , nor on what he bases his assertion . One can not reproach him for this , but it takes away all value from his statement . And no one , so far as I know , has gone any further . Whoever accepts Lenin ’ s formula , “ Without a revolutionary theory there is no revolutionary movement ” , is compelled to accept also the fact that there is practically no revolutionary movement at the present time . A little over two years ago a book which caused quite a stir came out in Germany , called The End of Capitalism ; the author , Ferdinand Fried , belonged to that well-known review , Die Tat , which has for a long time advocated a State capitalism , a managed and closed economy , with a dictatorship resting on the twin supports of the trade unions and the national-socialist movement . Revolutionaries have scarcely paid any attention to Fried ’ s book , and have judged it to be second-rate ; this is because they have mistakenly sought a coherent system in it , and the value of the book , considered simply as a document , has escaped them . The fundamental idea of the book is the power of the bureaucracy . It is no longer the possessors of the capital , the owners of the plant , who run a business ; thanks to shareholding , such owners are very many , and the few big shareholders who control them are concerned above all with financial deals . Those who actually run the business—directors , engineers , technicians of every kind—are , with a few exceptions , not owners but salaried personnel ; it is a bureaucracy . At the same time the power of the State , in all countries , has become more and more concentrated in the hands of a bureaucratic machine . Finally , the working-class movement is in the hands of a trade-union bureaucracy . “ Nowadays we are practically speaking under the domination of the trade-union bureaucracy , the industrial bureaucracy and the State bureaucracy , and these three bureaucracies are so alike that any one of them could be put in place of another. ” The conclusion is that one must organize a closed economy , managed by this triple bureaucracy united in one and the same machine . This is the very programme of fascism , with this difference , that fascism breaks up the trade-union machinery and creates trade unions placed directly under its control . There has been a lot of talk in America recently about a new theory called “ technocracy ” . The idea , as the name itself suggests , was that of a new type of economy , which would no longer fluctuate at the mercy of competition , nor be—as socialism wants it to be—in the hands of the workers either , but would be managed by technicians invested with a sort of dictatorial power . The conditions of this new economy , the system of distribution , the currency based on the “ unit of energy ” —all these are but details . The essential thing was this idea , which has , so we are told , occupied the attention of all Americans for some time , of replacing the capitalist class by another ruling class , which would have been none other than that very industrial bureaucracy Fried refers to . These absolutely new currents of thought , which are characteristic of the post-war period , and have developed with the present industrial crisis , should lead us to examine what has become nowadays of the process of industrial production . And we must recognize that the two economic categories established by Marx—capitalists and proletariat—are no longer sufficient to grasp the form of production . The capitalists have detached themselves more and more from production itself in order to devote themselves to economic warfare . The first oil king , Rockefeller , achieved his supremacy through a happy idea of an industrial description—the pipe-line ; the second , Deterding , only became Rockefeller ’ s lucky rival thanks to deals on the Stock Exchange and financial manipulations . This order of succession is symbolic . Whether as a caste or as a class , bureaucracy is a new factor in the social struggle . In the U.S.S.R. , it has transformed the dictatorship of the proletariat into a dictatorship exercised by itself , and has since directed the revolutionary workers of the entire world . In Germany , on the other hand , it has allied itself with financial capital to exterminate the best of the workers . One can say that in neither case has it played an independent role ; but , as long as feudalism lasted , the bourgeoisie , too , had to ally themselves with the oppressed classes against it , or with it against the oppressed classes . What is serious is that nowhere are the workers organized in an independent manner . The communists obey this Russian bureaucracy , just as incapable at the moment of playing a progressive part in the rest of the world as was the French bourgeoisie after Thermidor , when it had crushed those sans-culottes on whom it had relied for support . The “ reformist ” workers are in the hands of that trade-union bureaucracy which resembles the industrial and State bureaucracies as one drop of water does two other drops , and adheres mechanically to the State machine . The anarchists escape the bureaucratic hold only because they know nothing about action methodically organized . Faced with this situation , the controversial utterances of the oppositional communists , the revolutionary trade unionists , etc. , seem at any rate to be singularly lacking in topical interest . The communists accuse the social-democrats of being the “ quartermaster-sergeants of fascism ” , and they are absolutely right . They boast that they are a party capable of fighting fascism effectively , and they are unfortunately wrong . Confronted with the fascist menace , the one question that concerns militants is this . Is it possible to organize the workers in a given country without such organization secreting as it were a bureaucracy which immediately places the organization under a State machine , whether that of the country itself , or that of the U.S.S.R. ? The sinister comedy which social-democracy and the Communist International2 have now been playing for so many months at the expense of the German proletariat shows that the question is urgent , and perhaps the only one that matters at the moment . ON LENIN ’ S BOOK MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIOCRITICISM This work , the only one published by Lenin on purely philosophical questions , is directed against Mach and against the disciples , avowed or not , whom he had in 1908 in the ranks of social-democracy , and especially Russian social-democracy ; the best known of these was Bogdanov . Here Lenin examines in detail his opponents ’ doctrines , which all endeavoured , with more or less subtlety , to solve the problem of knowledge by doing away with the notion of an object exterior to thought ; he shows that they all come back in the end , once stripped of their pretentious phraseology , to the idealism of Berkeley , that is to say to a negation of the outside world ; he places in opposition to them the materialism of Marx and Engels . In this controversy , which took him away from his usual preoccupations , Lenin displayed once again his power of work , his taste for serious documentary analysis . The point of the discussion is easy to understand : you can not claim to stand for “ scientific socialism ” if you have not a clear idea of what science is , if consequently you have not posited in clear terms the problem of knowledge , of the relationship between thought and its object . Nevertheless , Lenin ’ s work is almost as tedious and even almost as little instructive as any textbook of philosophy . This is partly due to the mediocrity of the opponents Lenin is attacking , but above all to Lenin ’ s method itself . Lenin studied philosophy first of all in 1899 , when he was in Siberia ; then in 1908 , when he was preparing the book in question with a very definite object , namely , in order to refute the theorists in the working-class movement who wished to deviate from the materialism of Engels . That is a very characteristic method which consists in thinking with the object of refuting , the solution being already given before the research . And by what , then , could this solution be given ? By the Party , as it is given for the Catholic by the Church . For “ the theory of knowledge , exactly in the same way as political economy , is , in our contemporary society , a party science ” . As a matter of fact , one can not deny that there is a close connection between theoretical culture and the division of society into classes . All oppressive societies give birth to a false conception of the relationship between man and nature , from the mere fact that it is only the downtrodden who are in direct contact with nature , that is to say those who are excluded from theoretical culture , deprived of the right of and opportunity for self-expression ; and conversely , the false conception so formed tends to prolong the duration of the oppression , in so far as it causes this separation between thought and work to seem legitimate . In this sense , one is able to say of such and such a philosophical system , of such and such a conception of science , that they are reactionary or bourgeois . But it is not in this way that Lenin seems to understand it . He does not say : such and such a conception distorts the true relationship between man and the world , therefore it is reactionary ; but , such and such a conception deviates from materialism , leads to idealism , furnishes religion with arguments ; it is reactionary , therefore false . He was not at all concerned with seeing clearly into his own thought , but solely with maintaining intact the philosophical traditions on which the Party lived . Such a method of thought is not that of a free man . And yet in what other way would Lenin have been able to think ? As soon as a party finds itself cemented not only by the co-ordination of activities , but also by unity of doctrine , it becomes impossible for a good militant to think otherwise than in the manner of a slave . It is easy thenceforward to visualize how such a party will behave , once it is in power . The stifling régime which weighs at present upon the Russian people was already implied in embryo in Lenin ’ s attitude towards his own process of thought . Long before it robbed the whole of Russia of liberty of thought , the Bolshevik party had already taken it away from their own leader . Marx , fortunately , went about the process of thinking in a different way . In spite of a number of controversies which add nothing to his prestige , he sought rather to put some order into his own thoughts than to lay flat his opponents ; and he had learnt from Hegel that instead of refuting incomplete notions it is better “ to surmount them whilst retaining them ” . That is why Marx ’ s thought differs sensibly from that of the Marxists , Engels included , and nowhere so much as in the solution of the problem with which Lenin is dealing here , namely , that of knowledge and , more generally , of the relations between the mind and the world . In order to explain how it happens that the mind has knowledge of the world , one can either visualize the world as being a mere creation of the mind , or visualize the mind as being one of the products of the world—a product which , by an inexplicable coincidence , also constitutes its image or reflection . Lenin submits that every philosophy must come back , in the end , to one or other of these two conceptions , and he chooses , of course , the second . He quotes Engels ’ s formula according to which the mind and consciousness “ are products of the human brain , being , in the last resort , products of nature ” ; so that “ the products of the human brain being , in the last resort , products of nature , far from being in contradiction with the general scheme of nature , correspond to it ” ; and he repeats ad nauseam that this correspondence lies in the fact that the products of the human brain are , apparently thanks to Providence , the photographs , images , reflections of nature . As if the thoughts of a madman were not , by the same token , “ products of nature ” ! Now the two conceptions between which Lenin wants to force us to choose both proceed from the same method ; in order to solve the problem , they eliminate one of its terms . One of them eliminates the world , the object of knowledge , the other the mind , the subject of knowledge ; each strips knowledge of all meaning . If you want , not to construct a theory , but to ascertain the condition in which man is actually placed , you will not ask yourself how it happens that the world is known , but how , in fact , man knows the world ; and you will have to acknowledge the existence both of a world which lies beyond mind and of a mind which , far from passively reflecting the world , exercises itself on the world with the double aim of knowing it and transforming it . This is the way Descartes thought ; but it is significant that Lenin , in this book , does not even mention his name ; this is also , undoubtedly , the way Marx thought . It will doubtless be objected that Marx never expressed himself in disagreement with the doctrine expounded by Engels in his philosophical works ; that he read Anti-Dühring in manuscript and approved it ; but this only means that Marx never took the time to think over these problems sufficiently to become aware of what separated him from Engels . The entire works of Marx are permeated with a spirit incompatible with the vulgar materialism of Engels and Lenin . He never regards man as being a mere part of nature , but always as being at the same time , owing to the fact that he exercises a free activity , an antagonistic term vis-à-vis nature . In a study on Spinoza , he expressly reproaches him with confounding together man and the nature which contains him , instead of placing them in opposition . In his Dissertations on Feuerbach , he writes : “ The chief defect in all the materialistic doctrines that have so far been elaborated , including Feuerbach ’ s , lies in the fact that the real , the sensible , are conceived only in the form of object , of contemplation , and not as sensible human activity , as praxis , in a subjective way . That is why the active side has been developed—in an abstract way , it is true—in opposition to materialism , by idealism , which , of course , does not know real , sensible activity as such. ” Although these pronouncements are obscure , they at least state clearly that it is a question of making a synthesis of idealism and materialism , a synthesis in which a radical opposition between passive nature and human activity is preserved . Actually , Marx refuses to conceive of pure thought exercising itself outside all contact with nature ; but there is nothing in common between a doctrine which turns man as a whole into a mere product of nature , mind into a mere reflection , and a conception which shows reality appearing as a result of contact between mind and the world , in the act by which thinking man takes possession of the world . It is according to this conception that we must interpret historical materialism , which means , as Marx explains at length in his German Ideology , that the thoughts formed by men in the midst of given technical , economic and social conditions correspond to the way in which they act upon nature by producing their own conditions of existence . Finally , it is from this conception that the idea itself of the proletarian revolution must be drawn ; for the very essence of the capitalist system consists , as Marx forcibly showed , of a “ reversal of the relationship between subject and object ” , a reversal brought about by the subordination of subject to object , of “ the worker to the material conditions of work ” ; and the revolution can have no other meaning except to restore to the thinking subject his proper relationship to matter , by giving him back the control which it is his function to exercise over it . It is not in the least surprising that the Bolshevik party , whose very organization has always rested on the subordination of the individual , and which , once in power , was to enslave the worker to the machine every bit as much as capitalism , should have adopted as its doctrine the naïve materialism of Engels rather than the philosophy of Marx . Nor is it surprising that Lenin should have kept to a purely polemical method and preferred to entangle his opponents in all sorts of difficulties , rather than show how his materialistic theory would have avoided like difficulties . For him , a quotation from Anti-Dühring takes the place of all analyses ; but it is not by speaking disdainfully of the “ errors , long since refuted , committed by Kant ” that he can prevent the Critique of Pure Reason from remaining , in spite of its omissions , far more instructive than Anti-Dühring for anyone who wishes to ponder the problem of knowledge . And one can only laugh on seeing him—him who has constantly invoked “ dialectical materialism ” as a complete doctrine , capable of solving everything—admit , in a fragment concerning dialectics , that so far one has only been concerned with popularizing the dialectical method , and not with verifying its truth through the history of the sciences . Such a work is a very distressing mark of the socialist movement ’ s deficiency in the domain of pure theory . And one can not console oneself for it by saying that social and political action are more important than philosophy ; the revolution has got to be as much an intellectual as a social revolution , and purely theoretical speculation has its part therein , a part which it can not renounce under pain of making all the rest impossible . All genuine revolutionaries have understood that the revolution implies the dissemination of knowledge among the population as a whole . On that score there is complete agreement between Blanqui , who regards communism as impossible before “ enlightenment ” has been spread everywhere ; Bakunin , who wished to see science , according to his admirable expression , “ become fused with the real and immediate life of every individual ” ; and Marx , for whom socialism was to be , above all , the abolition of the “ degrading division of labour into intellectual and manual labour ” . However , we do not seem to have understood what the conditions of such a transformation are . To send every citizen to secondary school and university up to the age of 18 or 20 would be a feeble , not to say a useless , remedy for the actual state of things from which we suffer . If it were simply a question of popularizing science such as our scientists have made it for us , it would be an easy matter ; but nothing about present-day science can be popularized , unless it be the results , and this compels those one imagines one is instructing to believe without understanding . As for the methods which constitute the very soul of science , these are by their very essence unfathomable to laymen , and consequently also to scientists themselves , whom specialization always turns into laymen outside their own very restricted field of study . Thus , just in the same way as the worker , in modern industrial production , has to submit to the material conditions of his work , so the mind , in scientific research , has nowadays to submit to established scientific facts ; and science , which was to have made all things clear and unveiled all mysteries , has itself become the outstanding mystery , so much so that obscurity , and indeed absurdity , appear today in a scientific theory as a mark of profundity . Science has become the most modern form of the consciousness of man who has not yet found himself or has once again lost himself , to apply Marx ’ s telling dictum concerning religion . And no doubt present-day science can serve very suitably as a theology for our more and more bureaucracy-ridden society , if it is true , as Marx wrote in his youth , that “ the universal soul of bureaucracy is secrecy , mystery , inwardly through its hierarchical system , outwardly through its character of closed corporation ” . More generally , the condition of all privilege , and consequently of all oppression , is the existence of a corpus of knowledge essentially closed to the working masses , which thus find themselves compelled to believe just in the same way as they are forced to obey . Religion , nowadays , no longer suffices to fill this role , and science has taken its place . That is why Marx ’ s excellent observation about the criticism of religion , as being the condition of all criticism , must be extended also to include modern science . Socialism will not even be conceivable as long as science has not been stripped of its mystery . Descartes thought , in his time , he had founded a science without mystery , that is to say a science wherein there would be so much unity and simplicity of method that the most complicated parts would merely take longer and not be more difficult to understand than the simplest parts ; in which everyone would therefore be able to understand how the actual results which he had not the time to verify had been obtained ; in which each result would be given with the method leading to its discovery , in such a way that every schoolboy would have the feeling of inventing science anew . It was Descartes , too , who formed the project of a School of Arts and Crafts , where each artisan would learn fully to understand the theoretical bases of his own craft ; he thus showed himself to be more socialist , in the matter of culture , than all Marx ’ s disciples have been . However , he only accomplished what he wanted to a very limited extent , and even betrayed himself , out of vanity , by publishing a wilfully obscure Géométrie . Since his day , there have been hardly any scientists seeking to undermine their own caste privileges . As for the intellectuals of the working-class movement , they have not thought of tackling such an indispensable task ; an overwhelming task , it is true , which implies a critical re-examination of the whole of science , and especially of mathematics , where the quintessence of mystery has taken refuge ; but a task clearly set by the very notion of socialism , whose accomplishment , independent of outside conditions and the present position of the working-class movement , depends solely on those who will dare to undertake it ; furthermore , of such importance that one step made in this direction would be more useful perhaps to humanity and to the proletariat than a whole host of partial successes in the sphere of action . But the theorists of the socialist movement , when they leave the sphere of practical action or that useless commotion amidst rival tendencies , groups and sub-groups which gives them the illusion of action , never think at all of undermining the privileges of the intellectual caste—far from it ; instead , they elaborate a complicated and mysterious doctrine which serves to maintain bureaucratic oppression at the heart of the working-class movement . In this sense , philosophy is indeed , as Lenin said , a party matter . ( Critique sociale , November 1933 . ) 1 Confédération Générale du Travail . 2 The most fanatical communists ought to open their eyes before the call sent out by the Communist International on March 5th . For months and months past , the “ oppositionals ” have been insulted because they proclaimed the urgency of proposals for a single front at the top . At the beginning of February , the German communist party proudly , rejected , without even offering to negotiate , the “ pact of non-aggression proposed by the social-democrats . On February 19th , the Socialist International proposed a single front unconditionally , and obtained no other answer than Thorez ’ s speech before the Central Committee against any single front at the top , against any suspension of the attacks directed against the social-democrats . Then came the burning of the Reichstag , the arrest of thousands of militants , the terror which outlawed social-democrats and communistsalike , and pushed the panic-stricken social-democrat leaders into the arms of Hitler ( cf . Well ’ s letter ) , which made all propaganda and organization work almost impossible . And then , and then only , the Communist international , on March 5th , accepted , not only the proposal of February 19th , but even the “ pact of non-aggression ” ! So there was no principle precluding such tactics ? What was then to stop their being adopted in February , or even in January , or even before that , when the German proletariat could still take the offensive and fight with serious chances of success ? Does not this delay amount to a betrayal ? REFLECTIONS CONCERNINGTHE CAUSES OF LIBERTY ANDSOCIAL OPPRESSION With regard to human affairs , not to laugh , not to cry , not to become indignant , but to understand . Spinoza The being gifted with reason can make every obstacle serve as material for his work , and turn it to account . Marcus Aurelius The present period is one of those when everything that seems normally to constitute a reason for living dwindles away , when one must , on pain of sinking into confusion or apathy , call everything in question again . That the triumph of authoritarian and nationalist movements should blast almost everywhere the hopes that well-meaning people had placed in democracy and in pacifism is only a part of the evil from which we are suffering ; it is far deeper and far more widespread . One may well ask oneself if there exists a single sphere of public or private life where the very spring-heads of activity and of hope have not been poisoned by the conditions under which we live . Work is no longer done with the proud consciousness that one is being useful , but with the humiliating and agonizing feeling of enjoying a privilege bestowed by a temporary stroke of fortune , a privilege from which one excludes several human beings by the mere fact that one enjoys , in short , a job . The leaders of industry themselves have lost that naïve belief in unlimited economic progress which made them imagine that they had a mission . Technical progress seems to have gone bankrupt , since instead of happiness it has only brought the masses that physical and moral wretchedness in which we see them floundering ; moreover , technical innovations are now banned everywhere , or very nearly so , except in industries connected with war . As for scientific progress , it is difficult to see what can be the use of piling up still more knowledge on to a heap already much too vast to be able to be embraced by the minds even of specialists ; and experience has shown that our forefathers were mistaken in believing in the spread of enlightenment , since all that can be revealed to the masses is a miserable caricature of modern scientific culture , a caricature which , far from forming their judgment , accustoms them to be credulous . Art itself suffers the backlash of the general confusion , which partly deprives it of its public , and by that very fact impairs inspiration . Finally , family life has become nothing but anxiety , now that society is closed to the young . The very generation for whom a feverish expectation of the future is the whole of life , vegetates , all over the world , with the feeling that it has no future , that there is no room for it in our world . But if this evil is felt more sharply by youth , it remains common to the whole of humanity today . We are living through a period bereft of a future . Waiting for that which is to come is no longer a matter of hope , but of anguish . However , ever since 1789 , there has been one magic word which contains within itself all imaginable futures , and is never so full of hope as in desperate situations—that word is revolution . That is why , for some time now , we have often been hearing it uttered . We ought , so it seems , to be in a period of full revolution ; but in fact everything goes on as if the revolutionary movement were falling into decay with the very system it aspires to destroy . For more than a century , each new generation of revolutionaries has , in turn , placed its hopes in an impending revolution ; today , these hopes have lost everything which was able to serve them as buttresses . Neither in the régime that emerged from the October Revolution , nor in the two Internationals , nor in the independent socialist or communist parties , nor in the trade unions , nor in the anarchist organizations , nor in the small youth groups that have sprung up in such profusion in recent times , can one find anything vigorous , healthy or pure ; for a long time now the working class has shown no sign of that spontaneity on which Rosa Luxemburg counted , and which , moreover , has never manifested itself without being promptly drowned in blood ; the middle classes are only attracted by revolution when it is conjured up for demagogic purposes by apprentice dictators . It is often said that the situation is objectively revolutionary , and that all that is lacking is the “ subjective factor ” ; as if the complete absence of that very force which alone could transform the system were not an objective characteristic of the present situation , whose origins must be sought in the structure of our society ! That is why the first duty the present period imposes on us is to have enough intellectual courage to ask ourselves if the term “ revolution ” is anything else but a name , if it has any precise content , if it is not simply one of the numerous lies produced by the capitalist system in its rise to power which the present crisis is doing us the service of dissipating . This question seems impious , in view of all the pure and noble human beings who have sacrificed everything , their life included , in the service of this word . But only priests can claim to measure the value of an idea by the amount of blood it has caused to be shed . Who knows whether the revolutionaries have not shed their blood as vainly as those Greeks and Trojans of the poet , who , cheated by a false semblance , fought each other for ten years around the shade of Helen ? CRITIQUE OF MARXISM Up to now all those who have experienced the need to buttress their revolutionary feelings with precise concepts have found or thought they found these concepts in Marx . It is accepted once and for all that Marx , thanks to his general theory of history and to his analysis of bourgeois society , demonstrated the ineluctable necessity of an early upheaval , in which the oppression we suffer under capitalism would be abolished ; and indeed , by dint of being persuaded of the fact , we generally dispense with examining . the demonstration more closely . “ Scientific socialism ” has attained the status of a dogma , exactly in the same way as have all the results obtained by modern science , results in which each one thinks it is his duty to believe , without ever dreaming of enquiring into the method employed . As far as Marx is concerned , if one tries really to grasp his demonstration intellectually , one at once perceives that it contains very many more difficulties than the advocates of “ scientific socialism ” lead one to suppose . Actually , Marx gives a first-rate account of the mechanism of capitalist oppression ; but so good is it that one finds it hard to visualize how this mechanism could cease to function . As a rule , it is only the economic aspect of this oppression that holds our attention , that is to say the extortion of surplus value ; and , if we confine ourselves to this point of view , it is certainly easy to explain to the masses that this extortion is bound up with competition , which latter is in turn bound up with private property , and that the day when property becomes collective all will be well . Nevertheless , even within the limits of this apparently simple reasoning , a thousand difficulties present themselves on careful examination . For Marx showed clearly that the true reason for the exploitation of the workers is not any desire on the part of the capitalists to enjoy and consume , but the need to expand the undertaking as rapidly as possible so as to make it more powerful than its rivals . Now not only a business undertaking , but any sort of working collectivity , no matter what it may be , has to exercise the maximum restraint on the consumption of its members so as to devote as much time as possible to forging weapons for use against rival collectivities ; so that as long as there is , on the surface of the globe , a struggle for power , and as long as the decisive factor in victory is industrial production , the workers will be exploited . As a matter of fact , what Marx assumed , without , however , proving it , was that every kind of struggle for power will disappear on the day socialism is established in all industrial countries ; the only trouble is that , as Marx himself recognized , revolution can not take place everywhere at once ; and when it does take place in one country , it does not for that country do away with the need for exploiting and oppressing the mass of workers , but on the contrary accentuates the need , lest it be found weaker than the other nations . The history of the Russian Revolution furnishes a painful illustration of this . If we consider other aspects of capitalist oppression , other still more formidable difficulties appear , or rather the same difficulty under a more glaring light . The power which the bourgeoisie has to exploit and oppress the workers lies at the very foundations of our social life , and can not be destroyed by any political and juridical transformation . This power consists in the first place and essentially in the modern system of production itself , that is to say big industry . Pungent dicta abound in Marx ’ s writings on this subject of living labour being enslaved to dead labour , “ the reversal of the relationship between subject and object ” , “ the subordination of the worker to the material conditions of work ” . “ In the factory ” , he writes in Capital , “ there exists a mechanism independent of the workers , which incorporates them as living cogs… . The separation of the spiritual forces that play a part in production from manual labour , and the transformation of the former into power exercised by capital over labour , attain their fulfilment in big industry founded on mechanization . The detail of the individual destiny of the machine-worker fades into insignificance before the science , the tremendous natural forces and the collective labour which are incorporated in the machines as a whole and constitute with them the employer ’ s power. ” Thus the worker ’ s complete subordination to the undertaking and to those who run it is founded on the factory organization and not on the system of property . Similarly , “ the separation of the spiritual forces that play a part in production from manual labour ” , or , according to another formula , “ the degrading division of labour into manual and intellectual labour ” , is the very foundation of our culture , which is a culture of specialists . Science is a monopoly , not because public education is badly organized , but by its very nature ; non-scientists have access only to the results , not to the methods , that is to say they can only believe , not assimilate . “ Scientific socialism ” has itself remained the monopoly of a select few , and the “ intellectuals ” possess , unfortunately , the same privileges in the working-class movement as they do in bourgeois society . And the same applies , furthermore , on the political plane . Marx had clearly perceived that State oppression is founded on the existence of organs of government that are permanent and distinct from the population , namely , the bureaucratic , military and police machines ; but these permanent organs are the inevitable result of the radical distinction existing , in fact , between the managerial and executive functions . In this respect again , the working-class movement reproduces in full the vices of bourgeois society . At all levels we are brought up against the same obstacle . The whole of our civilization is founded on specialization , which implies the enslavement of those who execute to those who co-ordinate ; and on such a basis one can only organize and perfect oppression , not lighten it . Far from capitalist society having developed within itself the material conditions for a régime of liberty and equality , the establishment of such a régime presupposes a preliminary transformation in the realm of production and that of culture . We can only understand how Marx and his disciples could still believe in the possibility of a real democracy based on our present civilization if we take into account their theory of the development of productive forces . It is well known that , in Marx ’ s eyes , this development constitutes , in the last analysis , the true motive power of history , and that it is practically unlimited . Every social system , every dominant class has the “ task ” , the “ historic mission ” , of carrying the productive forces to an ever higher level , until the day when all further progress is arrested by the social cadres ; at that moment the productive forces rebel , break up these cadres , and a new class takes over power . The recognition of the fact that the capitalist system grinds down millions of men only enables one to condemn it morally ; what constitutes the historic condemnation of the system is the fact that , after having made productive progress possible , it is now an obstacle in its way . The essential task of revolutions consists in the emancipation not of men but of productive forces . As a matter of fact , it is clear that , as soon as these have reached a level of development high enough for production to be carried out at the cost of little effort , the two tasks coincide ; and Marx assumed that such was the case in our time . It was this assumption that enabled him to establish a harmony , indispensable to his moral tranquillity , between his idealistic aspirations and his materialistic conception of history . In his view , modern technique , once freed from capitalist forms of economy , can give men , here and now , sufficient leisure to enable them to develop their faculties harmoniously , and consequently bring about the disappearance , to a certain extent , of the degrading specialization created by capitalism ; and above all the further development of technique must lighten more and more , day by day , the burden of material necessity , and as an immediate consequence that of social constraint , until humanity reaches at last a truly paradisal state in which the most abundant production would be at the cost of a trifling expenditure of effort and the ancient curse of work would be lifted ; in short , in which the happiness of Adam and Eve before the fall would be regained . One can understand very well , starting from this conception , the attitude of the Bolsheviks , and why all of them , including Trotsky , treat democratic ideas with supreme disdain . They have found themselves powerless to bring about the workers ’ democracy foreshadowed by Marx ; but such a minor detail does not worry them , convinced as they are , on the one hand , that all attempts at social action which do not consist of developing productive forces are doomed to failure , on the other hand , that all progress in productive forces causes humanity to advance along the road leading to emancipation , even if it is at the cost of a temporary oppression . It is not surprising that , backed up by such moral certainty as this , they have astonished the world by their strength . It is seldom , however , that comforting beliefs are at the same time rational . Before even examining the Marxist conception of productive forces , one is struck by the mythological character it presents in all socialist literature , where it is assumed as a postulate . Marx never explains why productive forces should tend to increase ; by accepting without proof this mysterious tendency , he allies himself not with Darwin , as he liked to think , but with Lamarck , who in similar fashion founded his biological system on an inexplicable tendency of living creatures to adapt themselves . In the same way , why is it that , when social institutions are in opposition to the development of productive forces , victory should necessarily belong beforehand to the latter rather than the former ? Marx evidently does not assume that men consciously transform their social conditions in order to improve their economic conditions ; he knows perfectly well that up to the present social transformations have never been accompanied by any clear realization of their real long-term consequences ; he therefore implicitly assumes that productive forces possess a secret virtue enabling them to overcome obstacles . Finally , why does he assert without demonstration , and as a self-evident truth , that the productive forces are capable of unlimited development ? The whole of this doctrine , on which the Marxist conception of revolution entirely rests , is absolutely devoid of any scientific basis . In order to understand it , we must remember the Hegelian origins of Marxist thought . Hegel believed in a hidden mind at work in the universe , and that the history of the world is simply the history of this world mind , which , as in the case of everything spiritual , tends indefinitely towards perfection . Marx claimed to “ put back on its feet ” the Hegelian dialectic , which he accused of being “ upside down ” , by substituting matter for mind as the motive power of history ; but by an extraordinary paradox , he conceived history , starting from this rectification , as though he attributed to matter what is the very essence of mind—an unceasing aspiration towards the best . In this he was profoundly in keeping , moreover , with the general current of capitalist thought ; to transfer the principle of progress from mind to things is to give a philosophical expression to that “ reversal of the relationship between subject and object ” in which Marx discerned the very essence of capitalism . The rise of big industry made of productive forces the divinity of a kind of religion whose influence Marx came under , despite himself , when formulating his conception of history . The term religion may seem surprising in connection with Marx ; but to believe that our will coincides with a mysterious will which is at work in the universe and helps us to conquer is to think religiously , to believe in Providence . Besides , Marx ’ s vocabulary itself testifies to this since it contains quasi-mystical expressions such as “ the historic mission of the proletariat ” . This religion of productive forces , in whose name generations of industrial employers have ground down the labouring masses without the slightest qualm , also constitutes a factor making for oppression within the socialist movement . All religions make man into a mere instrument of Providence , and socialism , too , puts men at the service of historical progress , that is to say of productive progress . That is why , whatever may be the insult inflicted on Marx ’ s memory by the cult which the Russian oppressors of our time entertain for him , it is not altogether undeserved . Marx , it is true , never had any other motive except a generous yearning after liberty and equality ; but this yearning , once separated from the materialistic religion with which it was merged in his mind , no longer belongs to anything except what Marx contemptuously called utopian socialism . If Marx ’ s writings contained nothing more valuable than this , they might without loss be forgotten , at any rate except for his economic analyses . But such is not the case ; we find in Marx a different conception from that Hegelian doctrine turned inside out , namely , a materialism which no longer has anything religious about it and forms not a doctrine but a method of understanding and of action . It is no uncommon thing to find thus in quite great minds two distinct and even incompatible conceptions mingling together under cover of the inevitable looseness of language ; absorbed as they are in formulating new ideas , such minds have not the time to make a critical examination of what they have discovered . Marx ’ s truly great idea is that in human society as well as in nature nothing takes place otherwise than through material transformations . “ Men make their own history , but within certain fixed conditions. ” To desire is nothing ; we have got to know the material conditions which determine our possibilities of action ; and in the social sphere these conditions are defined by the way in which man obeys material necessities in supplying his own needs , in other words , by the method of production . A methodical improvement in social organization presupposes a detailed study of the method of production , in order to try to find out on the one hand what we may expect from it , in the immediate or distant future , from the point of view of output , and on the other hand what forms of social and cultural organization are compatible with it , and , finally , how it may itself be transformed . Only irresponsible human beings can neglect such a study and yet claim the right to domineer over society ; and , unfortunately , such is the case everywhere , as much in revolutionary circles as among the ruling classes . The materialistic method—that instrument which Marx bequeathed us—is an untried instrument ; no Marxist has ever really used it , beginning with Marx himself . The only really valuable idea to be found in Marx ’ s writings is also the only one that has been completely neglected . It is not surprising that the social movements springing from Marx have failed . The first question to consider is that concerning output . Are there any reasons for supposing that modern technique , at its present level , is capable—always supposing a fair distribution—of guaranteeing to everyone sufficient welfare and leisure so that the development of the individual may cease to be hampered by modern working conditions ? It seems that on this subject there are many illusions , purposely kept alive by demagogic interests . It is not profits which have to be calculated ; those of them that are reinvested in production would for the most part be taken away from the workers under any system . We should have to be able to calculate the total amount of labour that could be dispensed with at the cost of a transformation of the property system . Even that would not solve the problem ; we must bear in mind the labour involved in the complete reorganization of the productive machine , a reorganization necessary for production to be adapted to its new end , namely , the welfare of the masses ; we must not forget that the manufacture of armaments would not be abandoned before the capitalist system had been everywhere destroyed ; above all , we must provide for the fact that the abolition of individual profit , while causing certain forms of waste to disappear , would at the same time necessarily create others . It is impossible , of course , to make exact calculations ; but they are not indispensable for discerning that the abolition of private property would be far from sufficient in itself to prevent work in the mines and in the factories from continuing to weigh as a servitude on those who are subjected to it . But if the present state of technique is insufficient to liberate the workers , is there at any rate a reasonable hope that an unlimited development lies before it , which would imply an unlimited increase in productivity ? This is what everybody assumes , both among capitalists and socialists , without the smallest preliminary study of the question ; it is enough that the productivity of human effort should have increased in an unheard of manner for the last three centuries for it to be expected that this increase will continue at the same rate . Our so-called scientific culture has given us this fatal habit of generalizing , of arbitrarily extrapolating , instead of studying the conditions of a given phenomenon and the limits implied by them ; and Marx , whose dialectical method should have saved him from such an error , fell into it on this point just like other people . The problem is fundamental , and of a kind to determine all our future prospects ; it must be formulated with the utmost precision . To this end , the first thing is to know in what technical progress consists , what factors play a part in it , and to examine each factor separately ; for we mix up under the name of technical progress entirely different procedures that offer different possibilities of development . The first procedure that offers itself to man for producing more with less effort is the utilization of natural sources of energy ; and it is true , in a sense , that it is impossible to assign a precise limit to the benefits of this procedure , because we do not know what new sources of energy we shall one day be able to use ; but this does not mean to say that there can be prospects of unlimited progress in this direction , nor that progress in it is , generally speaking , assured . For nature does not give us this energy , whatever may be the form in which it offers itself—animal power , coal or petroleum ; we have to wrest it from her and transform it through our labour so as to adapt it to our own ends . Now , this labour does not necessarily become less as time goes on ; at present the very opposite is happening to us , since the extraction of coal and petroleum becomes continually and automatically less profitable and more costly . What is more , the deposits at present known are destined to become exhausted at the end of a relatively short time . Perhaps new deposits will be found ; but prospecting , the development of new workings , some of which will doubtless fail to pay—all that will be costly ; furthermore , we do not know how many unknown deposits there are in general , and in any case their number will not be unlimited . We may also—and no doubt some day we are bound to—discover new sources of energy ; but there is nothing to guarantee that their utilization will call for less labour than the utilization of coal or heavy oils ; the opposite is just as possible . It may even happen , at the worst , that the utilization of a natural source of energy involves more labour than the human expenditure of energy one is seeking to replace . In this field it is chance which decides ; for the discovery of a new and easily accessible source of energy or of an economic transformation process for a known source of energy is not one of those things one is sure of reaching on a basis of thinking methodically and spending the necessary time thereon . We deceive ourselves in this matter because we are in the habit of considering the development of science from outside and as a whole ; we do not realize that if certain scientific results depend entirely on the good use the scientist makes of his reasoning faculties , others are the result of lucky finds . This is so in the case of the utilization of the forces of nature . There is not the least doubt that every source of energy is transformable ; but the scientist is no more certain of coming across something economically advantageous in the course of his researches than is the explorer of arriving at a fertile territory . We can find an instructive example of this in the famous experiments connected with the thermic energy of the seas , about which there has been so much—and such useless—excitement . Now , as soon as chance enters in , the idea of continuous progress is no longer applicable . Consequently , to hope that the development of science will one day bring about , in some sort of automatic way , the discovery of a source of energy which would be almost immediately utilizable for all human needs , is simply day-dreaming . One can not prove that it is impossible ; and , strictly speaking , it is possible , too , that one fine day some sudden change in the astronomical order may give to vast expanses of the earth ’ s surface the bewitching climate that enables , so it is said , certain primitive tribes to live without working ; but possibilities of this description must never be taken into account . On the whole , it would not be reasonable to try to determine here and now what the future holds in store for the human race in this field . Apart from this , there exists only one other resource making it possible to diminish the total sum of human effort , namely , what we may call , to use a modern expression , the rationalization of labour . Two aspects of it may be distinguished ; one which concerns the relationship between simultaneous efforts , the other that between successive efforts ; in both cases progress resides in increasing the productivity of the efforts by the way in which these are combined . It is clear that in this field one can , strictly speaking , leave chance out of account , and that here the notion of progress has a meaning ; the question is to know whether this progress is unlimited , and , if not , whether we are still a long way from the limit . As far as what may be termed the rationalization of labour in space is concerned , the economic factors are the concentration , division and co-ordination of labour . The concentration of labour implies the reduction of all kinds of expenses that may be included all together under the heading of overheads , amongst them those relating to premises , transport , sometimes plant . As for the division of labour , that has far more astonishing results . Sometimes it makes it possible to reach a considerable speed in the execution of work which individual workers by themselves could accomplish as well , but much more slowly , and that because each would have to make on his own account the effort of co-ordination which the organization of labour enables one man to assume on behalf of several others . Adam Smith ’ s famous analysis with regard to the manufacture of pins is an example of this . At other times—and this is what matters most—division and co-ordination of effort make possible gigantic works which would be infinitely beyond the scope of a single man . We must also bear in mind the savings which regional specialization makes possible in the matter of transportation of energy and of raw materials , and doubtless many others besides , which it would take too long to investigate . At all events , as soon as we cast a look at the present system of production , it seems fairly obvious not only that these labour-saving factors contain within themselves a limit beyond which they become factors of expenditure , but furthermore that this limit has been reached and overstepped . For many years now the expansion of industrial undertakings has been accompanied , not by any reduction in overhead costs , but by an increase in them ; the functioning of an undertaking , having become too complex to allow for efficient supervision , leaves an ever wider and wider margin for waste and brings about an accelerated , and no doubt to a certain extent a parasitic , increase in the staff whose task it is to coordinate the various branches of the undertaking . The increase in exchange , which formerly played a tremendous role as a factor in economic progress , has begun in its turn to cause more overhead expenses than it avoids , because the goods remain a long time nonproductive , because the staff dealing with exchange is itself increasing at an accelerated tempo , and because transport consumes an ever-increasing amount of energy as a result of innovations for increasing speed-innovations that become necessarily more and more costly and less and less efficient as they succeed one another . Thus , in all these respects , progress is transformed nowadays , in a strictly speaking mathematical manner , into regression . The progress achieved by the co-ordination of effort in time is doubtless the most important factor of technical progress ; it is also the hardest to analyse . Ever since Marx , we have been in the habit of designating it by speaking of the substitution of inanimate labour for living labour , a dangerously vague formula in the sense that it conjures up the picture of a continuous evolution towards a stage of technique where , if one may so express it , all the jobs to be done would be done already . Such a picture is as chimerical as that of the existence of a natural source of energy as readily accessible to man as his own vital force . The substitution in question simply puts in the place of the movements that would enable certain results to be obtained directly other movements that produce these results indirectly , thanks to the purposeful arrangement of inert objects ; it still remains a question of entrusting to matter what seemed to be the role of human effort , but instead of making use of the energy supplied by certain natural phenomena , use is made of the resistance , solidity , hardness possessed by certain materials . In either case , the properties of blind and indifferent matter can only be adapted to human ends by human labour ; and in either case again , reason forbids one to assume in advance that this work of adaptation must necessarily be less than the effort that men would have to make so as to obtain directly the end they have in view . But whereas the utilization of natural sources of energy depends to a considerable extent on unforeseeable conjunctures , the utilization of inert and resistant materials has for the most part been effected according to a continuous progress which , once one has understood the principle involved , the mind is capable of embracing and extending . The first stage—as old as humanity—consists in entrusting to objects disposed in suitable places all those efforts of resistance whose aim it is to prevent certain movements on the part of certain things . The second stage constitutes mechanization as such ; mechanization became possible on the day when it was observed that one could not only make use of inert matter so as to ensure immobility where this was necessary , but also entrust it with maintaining the permanent relationships of movements with one other—relationships which up to then had on each occasion to be established by the mind . To this end , all that is necessary is that one should have been able to register these relationships , suitably transposed , in the forms impressed on solid matter . It is thus that one of the first developments which made for the introduction of mechanization consisted in relieving the weaver of the necessity of adapting the choice of threads to be drawn on his loom to the design of the cloth , and this by means of a piece of cardboard punched with holes corresponding to the design . If transpositions of this nature in the various branches of labour could only be obtained little by little , and thanks to inventions apparently due to inspiration or chance , it is because manual work combines the permanent elements that compose it in such a way as to conceal them more often than not under an appearance of variety ; that is why sectionalized hand-fabrication had to precede big industry . Finally , the third and last stage corresponds to automation , which is only beginning to make its appearance ; the principle behind it lies in the possibility of entrusting the machine not only with an operation that is invariably the same , but also with a combination of varied operations . This combination can be as vast , as complex as you like ; it is only necessary that the variety of operations should be defined and limited beforehand . Automation , which is still , so to say , at a primitive stage of development , can thus , theoretically , develop indefinitely ; and the use of such a technique for satisfying human needs knows no limits save those imposed by the share of the unforeseen in the conditions of human existence . If it were possible to conceive of conditions of existence absolutely devoid of any unforeseen contingency , then the American myth of the robot would have a meaning , and the complete abolition of human labour through a systematic organization of the world would be feasible . It is not so , and these are only fictions ; though it would still be useful to formulate these fictions , as an ideal limit , if men had at least the power to reduce progressively by some method or other the share of the unforeseen in their lives . But such is not the case , either , and no technique will ever relieve men of the necessity of continually adapting , by the sweat of their brow , the mechanical equipment they use . Under these conditions it is easy to conceive that a certain degree of automation might be more costly in human effort than a less advanced degree . At least it is easy to conceive it in an abstract way ; it is almost impossible to reach any concrete notion in this matter on account of the great number of factors which would have to be taken into account . The extraction of the metals from which machines are made can be done only with human labour ; and as it is a question of mining , the work becomes more and more arduous as it proceeds , not to mention the fact that the known deposits run the risk of becoming exhausted relatively quickly ; men reproduce themselves , iron does not . Nor must we forget , though financial balance-sheets , statistics , the publications of economists disdain to note it , that work in the mines is more painful , more exhausting , more dangerous than most other forms of work ; iron , coal , potassium—all these products are stained with blood . Besides , automatic machines are only a paying proposition as long as they are used for mass production in enormous quantities ; their functioning is therefore bound up with the chaos and waste involved in an excessive economic centralization ; furthermore , they create the temptation to produce far more than is required to satisfy real needs , which leads to the squandering of precious stores of human energy and of raw materials . Nor must we leave out of account the expenditure involved in all technical progress , on account of the preliminary research required , the need for adapting other branches of production to this progress , the scrapping of old plant which is often discarded when it could still have served for a long time . Nothing of all this is capable of being even approximately measured . It is only clear , in a general way , that the higher the level of technical efficiency the more the advantages to be derived from new developments diminish as compared with the drawbacks . We have , however , no means of ascertaining exactly whether we are near or far from the limit beyond which technical progress must transform itself into a factor of economic regression . We can only try to guess at it empirically , according to the way in which our contemporary economy is evolving . Now , what we see is that for some years past , in almost all industries , the various concerns have refused systematically to welcome technical innovations . The socialist and communist press takes advantage of this fact to pour out eloquent diatribes against capitalism , but it omits to explain by what miracle innovations that are at present costly would become economically paying under a socialist system or one so called . It is more reasonable to suppose that in this sphere we are not far from reaching the limit of useful progress ; and , seeing that the present-day complexity of economic relations and the formidable extension of credit prevent industrial leaders from immediately perceiving that a once paying factor has ceased to be so , we may even conclude , with all suitable reservations regarding so intricate a problem , that it is very likely this limit has already been overstepped . A serious study of the question ought , strictly speaking , to take many other elements into consideration . The various factors that go to increase productivity do not develop separately , although they have to be separated in analysis ; they combine together , and these combinations produce results difficult to foresee . Besides , technical progress does not only serve to obtain at low cost what one used to obtain before with considerable effort ; it also makes it possible to undertake what without it would have been almost unimaginable . It would be as well to examine the value of these new possibilities , while bearing in mind the fact that they are not only possibilities of construction , but also of destruction . But such a study would be forced to take into account the economic and social relations which necessarily go hand in hand with a given form of technical achievement . For the moment it is enough to have understood that the possibility of future progress so far as concerns productivity is not beyond question ; that , to all appearances , we have at present as many reasons for expecting to see it diminish as increase ; and , what is most important of all , that a continuous and unlimited increase in productivity is , strictly speaking , inconceivable . It is solely the frenzy produced by the speed of technical progress that has brought about the mad idea that work might one day become unnecessary . On the plane of pure science , this idea has found expression in the search for the “ perpetual motion machine ” , that is to say a machine which would go on producing work indefinitely without ever consuming any ; and the scientists made short work of it by propounding the law of the conservation of energy . In the social sphere , divagations are better received . The “ higher stage of communism ” , regarded by Marx as the final term of social evolution , is , in effect , a utopia absolutely analogous to that of perpetual motion . It is in the name of this utopia that revolutionaries have shed their blood . Or rather , they have shed their blood in the name either of this utopia or of the equally utopian belief that the present system of production could be placed by a mere decree at the service of a society of free and equal men . Is it surprising , then , if all this blood has been shed in vain ? The history of the working-class movement is thus lit up with a cruel , but singularly vivid , light . The whole of it can be summarized by remarking that the working class has never manifested strength save in so far as it has served something other than the workers ’ revolution . The working-class movement was able to give the illusion of power as long as it was still a question for it of helping to liquidate the vestiges of feudalism or to prepare the way for capitalist domination , whether under the form of private capitalism or that of State capitalism , as happened in Russia ; now that its role in that field is over and the industrial crisis confronts it with the problem of the effective seizure of power by the working masses , it is crumbling away and dissolving with a rapidity that breaks the hearts of those who had placed their faith in it . On its ruins interminable arguments are held which can only be smoothed over by the most ambiguous formulas ; for among all those who still persist in talking about revolution , there are perhaps not two who attach the same content to the term . And that is not in the least surprising . The word “ revolution ” is a word for which you kill , for which you die , for which you send the labouring masses to their death , but which does not possess any content . Yet perhaps one can give a meaning to the revolutionary ideal , if not as a possible prospect in view , at any rate as a theoretical limit of feasible social transformations . What we should ask of the revolution is the abolition of social oppression ; but for this notion to have at least a chance of possessing some meaning , we must be careful to distinguish between oppression and subordination of personal whims to a social order . So long as such a thing as a society exists , it will circumscribe the life of individuals within quite narrow limits and impose its rules on them ; but this inevitable constraint does not merit the name of oppression except in so far as , owing to the fact that it brings about a division between those who exercise it and those who are subject to it , it places the latter at the disposal of the former and thus causes those who command to exert a crushing physical and moral pressure over those who execute . Even when this distinction has been made , nothing entitles us to assume a priori that the abolition of oppression is either possible or even simply conceivable by way of limit . Marx demonstrated forcibly , in the course of analyses of whose far-reaching scope he was himself unaware , that the present system of production , namely , big industry , reduces the worker to the position of a wheel in the factory and a mere instrument in the hands of his employers ; and it is useless to hope that technical progress will , through a progressive and continuous reduction in productive effort , alleviate , to the point of almost causing it to disappear , the double burden imposed on man by nature and society . The problem is , therefore , quite clear ; it is a question of knowing whether it is possible to conceive of an organization of production which , though powerless to remove the necessities imposed by nature and the social constraint arising therefrom , would enable these at any rate to be exercised without grinding down souls and bodies under oppression . At a time like ours , to have grasped this problem clearly is perhaps a condition for being able to live at peace with oneself . If we can manage to conceive in concrete terms the conditions of this liberating organization , then it only remains for us to exercise , in order to move towards it , all the powers of action , small or great , at our disposal ; and if , on the other hand , we realize clearly that the possibility of such a system of production is not even conceivable , we at least gain the advantage of being able legitimately to resign ourselves to oppression and of ceasing to regard ourselves as accomplices in it because we fail to do anything effective to prevent it . ANALYSIS OF OPPRESSION The problem is , in short , to know what it is that links oppression in general and each form of oppression in particular to the system of production ; in other words , to succeed in grasping the mechanism of oppression , in understanding by what means it arises , subsists , transforms itself , by what means , perhaps , it might theoretically disappear . This is , to all intents and purposes , a novel question . For centuries past , noble minds have regarded the power of oppressors as constituting a usurpation pure and simple , which one had to try to oppose either by simply expressing a radical disapproval of it , or else by armed force placed at the service of justice . In either case , failure has always been complete ; and never was it more strikingly so than when it took on momentarily the appearance of victory , as happened with the French Revolution , when , after having effectively succeeded in bringing about the disappearance of a certain form of oppression , people stood by , helpless , watching a new oppression immediately being set up in its place . In his ponderings over this resounding failure , which had come to crown all previous ones , Marx finally came to understand that you can not abolish oppression so long as the causes which make it inevitable remain , and that these causes reside in the objective—that is to say material—conditions of the social system . He consequently elaborated a completely new conception of oppression , no longer considered as the usurpation of a privilege , but as the organ of a social function . This function is that very one which consists in developing the productive forces , in so far as this development calls for severe efforts and serious hardships ; and Marx and Engels perceived a reciprocal relationship between this development and social oppression . In the first place , according to them , oppression becomes established only when improvements in production have brought about a division of labour sufficiently advanced for exchange , military command and government to constitute distinct functions ; on the other hand , oppression , once established , stimulates the further development of the productive forces , and changes in form as and when this development so demands , until the day when , having become a hindrance to it instead of a help , it disappears purely and simply . However brilliant the concrete analyses may be by which Marxists have illustrated this thesis , and although it constitutes an improvement on the naïve expressions of indignation which it replaced , one can not say that it throws light on the mechanism of oppression . It only partially describes its origins ; for why should the division of labour necessarily turn into oppression ? It by no means entitles us to a reasonable expectation of its ending ; for if Marx believed himself to have shown how the capitalist system finally hinders production , he did not even attempt to prove that , in our day , any other oppressive system would hinder it in like manner . Furthermore , one fails to understand why oppression should not manage to continue , even after it has become a factor of economic regression . Above all , Marx omits to explain why oppression is invincible as long as it is useful , why the oppressed in revolt have never succeeded in founding a non-oppressive society , whether on the basis of the productive forces of their time , or even at the cost of an economic regression which could hardly increase their misery ; and , lastly , he leaves completely in the dark the general principles of the mechanism by which a given form of oppression is replaced by another . What is more , not only have Marxists not solved a single one of these problems , but they have not even thought it their duty to formulate them . It has seemed to them that they had sufficiently accounted for social oppression by assuming that it corresponds to a function in the struggle against nature . Even then , they have only really brought out this correspondence in the case of the capitalist system ; but , in any case , to suppose that such a correspondence constitutes an explanation of the phenomenon is to apply unconsciously to social organisms Lamarck ’ s famous principle , as unintelligible as it is convenient , “ the function creates the organ ” . Biology only started to be a science on the day when Darwin replaced this principle by the notion of conditions of existence . The improvement lies in the fact that the function is no longer considered as the cause , but as the result of the organ—the only intelligible order ; the part played by cause is henceforth attributed only to a blind mechanism , that of heredity combined with accidental variations . Actually , by itself , all this blind mechanism can do is to produce haphazardly anything whatsoever ; the adaptation of the organ to the function here enters into play in such a manner as to limit chance by eliminating the non-viable structures , no longer as a mysterious tendency , but as a condition of existence ; and this condition is defined by the relationship of the organism under consideration to its partly inert , partly living environment , and more especially to similar rival organisms . Adaptation is henceforth conceived in regard to living beings as an exterior and no longer an interior necessity . It is clear that this luminous method is not only valid in biology , but wherever one is confronted by organized structures which have not been organized by anybody . In order to be able to appeal to science in social matters , we ought to have effected with respect to Marxism an improvement similar to that which Darwin effected with respect to Lamarck . The causes of social evolution must no longer be sought elsewhere than in the daily efforts of men considered as individuals . These efforts are certainly not directed haphazardly ; they depend , in each individual case , on temperament , education , routine , customs , prejudices , natural or acquired needs , environment , and above all , broadly speaking , human nature , a term which , although difficult to define , is probably not devoid of meaning . But given the almost infinite diversity of individuals , and especially the fact that human nature includes among other things the ability to innovate , to create , to rise above oneself , this warp and woof of incoherent efforts would produce anything whatever in the way of social organization , were it not that chance found itself restricted in this field by the conditions of existence to which every society has to conform on pain of being either subdued or destroyed . The men who submit to these conditions of existence are more often than not unaware of them , for they act not by imposing a definite direction on the efforts of each one , but by rendering ineffective all efforts made in directions disallowed by them . These conditions of existence are determined in the first place , as in the case of living beings , on the one hand by the natural environment and on the other hand by the existence , activity and especially competition of other organisms of the same species , that is to say here of other social groups . But still a third factor enters into play , namely , the organization of the natural environment , capital equipment , armaments , methods of work and of warfare ; and this factor occupies a special position owing to the fact that , though it acts upon the form of social organization , it in turn undergoes the latter ’ s reaction upon it . Furthermore , this factor is the only one over which the members of a society can perhaps exercise some control . This outline is too abstract to serve as a guide ; but if on the basis of this summary view we could arrive at some concrete analyses , it would at last become possible to formulate the social problem . The enlightened goodwill of men acting in an individual capacity is the only possible principle of social progress ; if social necessities , once clearly perceived , were found to lie outside the range of this goodwill in the same way as those which govern the stars , each man would have nothing more to do but to watch history unfolding as one watches the seasons go by , while doing his best to spare himself and his loved ones the misfortune of being either an instrument or a victim of social oppression . If this is not so , it would be necessary first of all to define by way of an ideal limit the objective conditions that would permit of a social organization absolutely free from oppression ; then seek out by what means and to what extent the conditions actually given can be transformed so as to bring them nearer to this ideal ; find out what is the least oppressive form of social organization for a body of specific objective conditions ; and lastly , define in this field the power of action and responsibilities of individuals as such . Only on this condition could political action become something analogous to a form of work , instead of being , as has been the case hitherto , either a game or a branch of magic . Unfortunately , in order to reach this stage , what is required is not only searching , rigorous thinking , subjected , so as to avoid all possibility of error , to the most exacting checking , but also historical , technical and scientific investigations of an unparalleled range and precision , and conducted from an entirely new point of view . However , events do not wait ; time will not stop in order to afford us leisure ; the present forces itself urgently on our attention and threatens us with calamities which would bring in their train , amongst many other harrowing misfortunes , the material impossibility of studying or writing otherwise than in the service of the oppressors . What are we to do ? There would be no point in letting oneself be swept along in the mêlée by an ill-considered enthusiasm . No one has the faintest idea of either the objectives or the means of what is still from force of habit called revolutionary action . As for reformism , the principle of the lesser evil on which it is based is certainly eminently reasonable , however discredited it may be through the fault of those who have hitherto made use of it ; though remember , if it has so far served only as a pretext for capitulation , this is due not to the cowardice of a few leaders , but to an ignorance unfortunately common to all ; for as long as the worst and the best have not been defined in terms of a clearly and concretely conceived ideal , and then the precise margin of possibilities determined , we do not know which is the lesser evil , and consequently we are compelled to accept under this name anything effectively imposed by those who dispose of force , since any existing evil whatever is always less than the possible evils which uncalculating action invariably runs the risk of bringing about . Broadly speaking , blind men such as we are in these days have only the choice between surrender and adventure . And yet we can not avoid the duty of determining here and now the attitude to adopt with regard to the present situation . That is why , until we have—if , indeed , such a thing is possible—taken to pieces the social mechanism , it is permissible perhaps to try to outline its principles ; provided it be clearly understood that such a rough sketch rules out any kind of categorical assertion , and aims solely at submitting a few ideas , by way of hypotheses , to the critical examination of honest people . Besides , we are far from being without a guide on the subject . If Marx ’ s system , in its broad outlines , is of little assistance , it is a different matter when it comes to the analyses he was led to make by the concrete study of capitalism , and in which , while believing that he was limiting himself to describing a system , he probably more than once seized upon the hidden nature of oppression itself . Among all the forms of social organization which history has to show , there are very few which appear to be really free from oppression ; and these few are not very well known . All of them correspond to an extremely low level of production , so low that the division of labour is pretty well unknown , except between the sexes , and each family produces little more than its own requirements . It is sufficiently obvious , moreover , that such material conditions necessarily rule out oppression , since each man , compelled to sustain himself personally , is continually at grips with outside nature ; war itself at this stage , is war of pillage and extermination , not of conquest , because the means of consolidating a conquest and especially of turning it to account are lacking . What is surprising is not that oppression should make its appearance only after higher forms of economy have been reached , but that it should always accompany them . This means , therefore , that as between a completely primitive economy and more highly developed forms of economy there is a difference not only of degree , but also of kind . And , in fact , although from the point of view of consumption there is but a change-over to slightly better conditions , production , which is the decisive factor , is itself transformed in its very essence . This transformation consists at first sight in a progressive emancipation with respect to nature . In completely primitive forms of production—hunting , fishing , gathering—human effort appears as a simple reaction to the inexorable pressure continually exercised on man by nature , and that in two ways . To start with , it takes place , to all intents and purposes , under immediate compulsion , under the ever-present spur of natural needs ; and , by an indirect consequence , the action seems to receive its form from nature herself owing to the important part played therein by an intuition comparable to animal instinct and a patient observation of the most frequent natural phenomena , also owing to the indefinite repetition of methods that have often succeeded without men ’ s knowing why , and which are doubtless regarded as being welcomed by nature with special favour . At this stage , each man is necessarily free with respect to other men , because he is in direct contact with the conditions of his own existence , and because nothing human interposes itself between them and him ; but , on the other hand , and to the same extent , he is narrowly subjected to nature ’ s dominion , and he shows this clearly enough by deifying her . At higher stages of production , nature ’ s compulsion continues certainly to be exercised , and still pitilessly , but in an apparently less immediate fashion ; it seems to become more and more liberalized and to leave an increasing margin to man ’ s freedom of choice , to his faculty of initiative and decision . Action is no longer tied moment by moment to nature ’ s exigencies ; men learn how to store up reserves on a long-term basis for meeting needs not yet actually felt ; efforts which can be only of indirect usefulness become more and more numerous ; at the same time a systematic co-ordination in time and in space becomes possible and necessary , and its importance increases continually . In short , man seems to pass by stages , with respect to nature , from servitude to dominion . At the same time nature gradually loses her divine character , and divinity more and more takes on human shape . Unfortunately , this emancipation is only a flattering semblance . In reality , at these higher stages , human action continues , as a whole , to be nothing but pure obedience to the brutal spur of an immediate necessity ; only , instead of being harried by nature , man is henceforth harried by man . However , it is still the same pressure exerted by nature that continues to make itself felt , although indirectly ; for oppression is exercised by force , and in the long run all force originates in nature . The notion of force is far from simple , and yet it is the first that has to be elucidated in order to formulate the problems of society . Force and oppression—that makes two ; but what needs to be understood above all is that it is not the manner in which use is made of some particular force , but its very nature , which determines whether it is oppressive or not . Marx clearly perceived this in connection with the State ; he understood that this machine for grinding men down , can not stop grinding as long as it goes on functioning , no matter in whose hands it may be . But this insight has a far more general application . Oppression proceeds exclusively from objective conditions . The first of these is the existence of privileges ; and it is not men ’ s laws or decrees which determine privileges , nor yet titles to property ; it is the very nature of things . Certain circumstances , which correspond to stages , no doubt inevitable , in human development , give rise to forces which come between the ordinary man and his own conditions of existence , between the effort and the fruit of the effort , and which are , inherently , the monopoly of a few , owing to the fact that they can not be shared among all ; thenceforward these privileged beings , although they depend , in order to live , on the work of others , hold in their hands the fate of the very people on whom they depend , and equality is destroyed . This is what happens to begin with when the religious rites by which man thinks to win nature over to his side , having become too numerous and complicated to be known by all , finally become the secret and consequently the monopoly of a few priests ; the priest then disposes , albeit only through a fiction , of all of nature ’ s powers , and it is in their name that he exercises authority . Nothing essential is changed when this monopoly is no longer made up of rites but of scientific processes , and when those in possession of it are called scientists and technicians instead of priests . Arms , too , give rise to a privilege from the day when , on the one hand , they are sufficiently powerful to render any defence by unarmed against armed men impossible , and , on the other , the handling of them has become sufficiently advanced , and consequently difficult , to require a long apprenticeship and continuous practice . For henceforth the workers are powerless to defend themselves , whereas the warriors , albeit incapable of production , always take forcible possession of the fruits of other people ’ s labour ; the workers are thus at the mercy of the warriors , and not the other way about . The same thing applies to gold , and more generally to money , as soon as the division of labour is so far developed that no worker can live off his own products without having exchanged at any rate some of them for those of others ; the organization of exchange then becomes necessarily the monopoly of a few specialists who , having money under their control , can both obtain for themselves , in order to live , the products of others ’ labour , and at the same time deprive the producers of the indispensably necessary . In short , wherever , in the struggle against men or against nature , efforts need to be multiplied and co-ordinated to be effective , coordination becomes the monopoly of a few leaders as soon as it reaches a certain degree of complexity , and execution ’ s primary law is then obedience ; this is true both for the management of public affairs and for that of private undertakings . There may be other sources of privilege , but these are the chief ones ; furthermore , except in the case of money , which appears at a given moment of history , all these factors enter into play under all systems of oppression ; what changes is the way in which they are distributed and combined , the degree of concentration of power , and also the more or less closed and consequently more or less mysterious character of each monopoly . Nevertheless , privileges , of themselves , are not sufficient to cause oppression . Inequality could be easily mitigated by the resistance of the weak and the feeling for justice of the strong ; it would not lead to a still harsher form of necessity than that of natural needs themselves , were it not for the intervention of a further factor , namely , the struggle for power . As Marx clearly understood in the case of capitalism , and as a few moralists have perceived in a more general way , power contains a sort of fatality which weighs as pitilessly on those who command as on those who obey ; nay more , it is in so far as it enslaves the former that , through their agency , it presses down upon the latter . The struggle against nature entails certain inescapable necessities which nothing can turn aside , but these necessities contain within themselves their own limits ; nature resists , but she does not defend herself and where she alone is involved , each situation presents certain well-defined obstacles which arouse the best in human effort . It is altogether different as soon as relations between man and man take the place of direct contact between man and nature . The preservation of power is a vital necessity for the powerful , since it is their power which provides their sustenance ; but they have to preserve it both against their rivals and against their inferiors , and these latter can not do otherwise than try to rid themselves of dangerous masters ; for , through a vicious circle , the master produces fear in the slave by the very fact that he is afraid of him , and vice versa ; and the same is true as between rival powers . What is more , the two struggles that every man of power has to wage—first against those over whom he rules , secondly against his rivals—are inextricably bound up together and each is all the time rekindling the other . A power , whatever it may be , must always tend towards strengthening itself at home by means of successes gained abroad , for such successes provide it with more powerful means of coercion ; besides , the struggle against its rivals rallies behind it its own slaves , who are under the illusion they have a personal interest in the result of the battle . But , in order to obtain from the slaves the obedience and sacrifices indispensable to victory , that power has to make itself more oppressive ; to be in a position to exercise this oppression , it is still more imperatively compelled to turn outwards ; and so on . We can follow out the same chain of events by starting from another link ; show how a given social group , in order to be in a position to defend itself against the outside powers threatening to lay hands on it , must itself submit to an oppressive form of authority ; how the power thus set up , in order to maintain its position , must stir up conflicts with rival powers ; and so on , once again . Thus it is that the most fatal of vicious circles drags the whole society in the wake of its masters in a mad merry-go-round . There are only two ways of breaking the circle , either by abolishing inequality , or else by setting up a stable power , a power such that there exists a balance between those who command and those who obey . It is this second solution that has been sought by all whom we call upholders of order , or at any rate all those among them who have been moved neither by servility nor by ambition ; it was doubtless so with the Latin writers who praised “ the immense majesty of the Roman peace ” , with Dante , with the reactionary school at the beginning of the nineteenth century , with Balzac , and is so today with sincere and thoughtful men of the Right . But this stability of power—objective of those who call themselves realists—shows itself to be a chimera , if one examines it closely , on the same grounds as the anarchists ’ utopia . Between man and matter , each action , whether successful or not , establishes a balance that can only be upset from outside ; for matter is inert . A displaced stone accepts its new position ; the wind consents to guide to her destination the same ship which it would have sent off her course if sails and rudder had not been properly adjusted . But men are essentially active beings and have a faculty of self-determination which they can never renounce , even should they so desire , except on the day when , through death , they drop back into the state of inert matter ; so that every victory won over men contains within itself the germ of a possible defeat , unless it goes as far as extermination . But extermination abolishes power by abolishing its object . Thus there is , in the very essence of power , a fundamental contradiction that prevents it from ever existing in the true sense of the word ; those who are called the masters , ceaselessly compelled to reinforce their power for fear of seeing it snatched away from them , are for ever seeking a dominion essentially impossible to attain ; beautiful illustrations of this search are offered by the infernal torments in Greek mythology . It would be otherwise if one man could possess in himself a force superior to that of many other men put together ; but such is never the case ; the instruments of power—arms , gold , machines , magical or technical secrets—always exist independently of him who disposes of them , and can be taken up by others . Consequently all power is unstable . Generally speaking , among human beings , since the relationships between rulers and ruled are never fully acceptable , they always constitute an irremediable disequilibrium which is continually aggravating itself ; the same is true even in the sphere of private life , where love , for example , destroys all balance in the soul as soon as it seeks to dominate or to be dominated by its object . But here at any rate there is nothing external to prevent reason from returning and putting everything to rights by establishing liberty and equality ; whereas social relationships , in so far as the very methods of labour and of warfare rule out equality , seem to cause madness to weigh down on mankind in the manner of an external fatality . For , owing to the fact that there is never power , but only a race for power , and that there is no term , no limit , no proportion set to this race , neither is there any limit or proportion set to the efforts that it exacts ; those who give themselves up to it , compelled to do always better than their rivals , who in their turn strive to do better than they , must sacrifice not only the existence of the slaves , but their own also and that of their nearest and dearest ; so it is that Agamemnon sacrificing his daughter lives again in the capitalists who , to maintain their privileges , acquiesce lightheartedly in wars that may rob them of their sons . Thus the race for power enslaves everybody , strong and weak alike . Marx saw this clearly with reference to the capitalist system . Rosa Luxemburg used to inveigh against the aspect of “ aimless merry-goround ” presented by the Marxist picture of capitalist accumulation , that picture in which consumption appears as a “ necessary evil ” to be reduced to the minimum , a mere means for keeping alive those who devote themselves , whether as leaders or as workers , to the supreme object , which is none other than the manufacture of capital equipment , that is to say of the means of production . And yet it is the profound absurdity of this picture which gives it its profound truth ; a truth which extends singularly beyond the framework of the capitalist system . The only characteristic peculiar to this system is that the instruments of industrial production are at the same time the chief weapons in the race for power ; but always the methods pursued in the race for power , whatever they may be , bring men under their subjection through the same frenzy and impose themselves on them as absolute ends . It is the reflection of this frenzy that lends an epic grandeur to works such as the Comédie Humaine , Shakespeare ’ s Histories , the chansons de geste , or the Iliad . The real subject of the Iliad is the sway exercised by war over the warriors , and , through them , over humanity in general ; none of them knows why each sacrifices himself and all his family to a bloody and aimless war , and that is why , all through the poem , it is the gods who are credited with the mysterious influence which nullifies peace negotiations , continually revives hostilities , and brings together again the contending forces urged by a flash of good sense to abandon the struggle . Thus in this ancient and wonderful poem there already appears the essential evil besetting humanity , the substitution of means for ends . At times war occupies the forefront , at other times the search for wealth , at other times production ; but the evil remains the same . The common run of moralists complain that man is moved by his private interest : would to heaven it were so ! Private interest is a self-centred principle of action , but at the same time restricted , reasonable and incapable of giving rise to unlimited evils . Whereas , on the other hand , the law of all activities governing social life , except in the case of primitive communities , is that here each one sacrifices human life—in himself and in others—to things which are only means to a better way of living . This sacrifice takes on various forms , but it all comes back to the question of power . Power , by definition , is only a means ; or to put it better , to possess a power is simply to possess means of action which exceed the very limited force that a single individual has at his disposal . But power-seeking , owing to its essential incapacity to seize hold of its object , rules out all consideration of an end , and finally comes , through an inevitable reversal , to take the place of all ends . It is this reversal of the relationship between means and end , it is this fundamental folly that accounts for all that is senseless and bloody right through history . Human history is simply the history of the servitude which makes men—oppressors and oppressed alike—the plaything of the instruments of domination they themselves have manufactured , and thus reduces living humanity to being the chattel of inanimate chattels . Thus it is things , not men , that prescribe the limits and laws governing this giddy race for power . Men ’ s desires are powerless to control it . The masters may well dream of moderation , but they are prohibited from practising this virtue , on pain of defeat , except to a very slight extent ; so that , apart from a few almost miraculous exceptions , such as Marcus Aurelius , they quickly become incapable even of conceiving it . As for the oppressed , their permanent revolt , which is always simmering , though it only breaks out now and then , can operate in such a way as to aggravate the evil as well as to restrict it ; and on the whole it rather constitutes an aggravating factor in that it forces the masters to make their power weigh ever more heavily for fear of losing it . From time to time the oppressed manage to drive out one team of oppressors and to replace it by another , and sometimes even to change the form of oppression ; but as for abolishing oppression itself that would first mean abolishing the sources of it , abolishing all the monopolies , the magical and technical secrets that give a hold over nature , armaments , money , co-ordination of labour . Even if the oppressed were sufficiently conscious to make up their minds to do so , they could not succeed . It would be condemning themselves to immediate enslavement by the social groupings that had not carried out the same change ; and even were this danger to be miraculously averted , it would be condemning themselves to death , for , once men have forgotten the methods of primitive production and have transformed the natural environment into which these fitted , they can not recover immediate contact with nature . It follows that , in spite of so many vague desires to put an end to madness and oppression , the concentration of power and the aggravation of its tyrannical character would know no bounds were these not by good fortune found in the nature of things . It behoves us to determine roughly what these bounds can be ; and for this purpose we must keep in mind the fact that , if oppression is a necessity of social life , this necessity has nothing providential about it . It is not because it becomes detrimental to production that oppression can come to an end ; the “ revolt of the productive forces ” , so naïvely invoked by Trotsky as a factor in history , is a pure fiction . We should be mistaken likewise in assuming that oppression to be ineluctable as soon as the productive forces have been sufficiently developed to ensure welfare and leisure for all . Aristotle admitted that there would no longer be anything to stand in the way of the abolition of slavery if it were possible to have the indispensable jobs done by “ mechanical slaves ” , and when Marx attempted to forecast the future of the human species , all he did was to take up this idea and develop it . It would be true if men were guided by considerations of welfare ; but from the days of the Iliad to our own times , the senseless demands made by the struggle for power have taken away even the leisure for thinking about welfare . The raising of the output of human effort will remain powerless to lighten the load of this effort as long as the social structure implies the reversal of the relationship between means and ends , in other words , as long as the methods of labour and of warfare give to a few men a discretionary power over the masses ; for the fatigues and privations that have become unnecessary in the struggle against nature will be absorbed by the war carried on between men for the defence or acquisition of privileges . Once society is divided up into men who command and men who execute , the whole of social life is governed by the struggle for power , and the struggle for subsistence only enters in as one factor , indispensable to be sure , of the former . The Marxist view , according to which social existence is determined by the relations between man and nature established by production , certainly remains the only sound basis for any historical investigation ; only these relations must be considered first of all in terms of the problem of power , the means of subsistence forming simply one of the data of this problem . This order seems absurd , but it merely reflects the essential absurdity lying at the very heart of social life . A scientific study of history would thus be a study of the actions and reactions which are perpetually arising between the organization of power and the methods of production ; for although power depends on the material conditions of life , it never ceases to transform these conditions themselves . Such a study goes very far beyond our possibilities at the moment ; but before grappling with the infinite complexity of the facts , it is useful to make an abstract diagram of this interplay of actions and reactions , rather in the same way as astronomers have had to invent an imaginary celestial sphere so as to find their way about among the movements and positions of the stars . We must try first of all to draw up a list of the inevitable necessities which limit all species of power . In the first place , any sort of power relies upon instruments which have in each situation a given scope . Thus you do not command in the same way , by means of soldiers armed with bows and arrows , spears and swords as you do by means of aeroplanes and incendiary bombs ; the power of gold depends on the role played by exchanges in economic life ; that of technical secrets is measured by the difference between what you can accomplish with their aid and what you can accomplish without them ; and so on . As a matter of fact , one must always include in this balance-sheet the subterfuges by which the powerful obtain through persuasion what they are totally unable to obtain by force , either by placing the oppressed in a situation such that they have or think they have an immediate interest in doing what is asked of them , or by inspiring them with a fanaticism calculated to make them accept any and every sacrifice . Secondly , since the power that a human being really exercises extends only to what is effectively under his control , power is always running up against the actual limits of the controlling faculty , and these are extremely narrow . For no single mind can encompass a whole mass of ideas at once ; no man can be in several places at once ; and for master and slave alike there are never more than twenty-four hours in a day . Collaboration apparently constitutes a remedy for this drawback ; but as it is never absolutely free from rivalry , it gives rise to infinite complications . The faculties of examining , comparing , weighing , deciding , combining are essentially individual , and consequently the same thing applies also to power , whose exercise is inseparable from these faculties ; collective power is a fiction , at any rate in final analysis . As for the number of interests that can come under the control of one single man , that depends to a very large extent on individual factors such as breadth and quickness of intelligence , capacity for work , firmness of character ; but it also depends on the objective conditions of the control exercised , more or less rapid methods of transport and communication , simplicity or otherwise of the machinery of power . Lastly , the exercise of any form of power is subject to the existence of a surplus in the production of commodities , and a sufficiently large surplus so that all those engaged , whether as masters or as slaves , in the struggle for power , may be able to live . Obviously , the extent of such surplus depends on the methods of production , and consequently also on the social organization . Here , therefore , are three factors that enable one to conceive political and social power as constituting at each moment something analogous to a measurable force . However , in order to complete the picture , one must bear in mind that the men who find themselves in relationship , whether as masters or as slaves , with the phenomenon of power are unconscious of this analogy . The powerful , be they priests , military leaders , kings or capitalists , always believe that they command by divine right ; and those who are under them feel themselves crushed by a power which seems to them either divine or diabolical , but in any case supernatural . Every oppressive society is cemented by this religion of power , which falsifies all social relations by enabling the powerful to command over and above what they are able to impose ; it is only otherwise in times of popular agitation , times when , on the contrary , all—rebellious slaves and threatened masters alike—forget how heavy and how solid the chains of oppression are . Thus a scientific study of history ought to begin by analysing the reactions brought to bear at each moment by power on the conditions which assign to it objectively its limits ; and a hypothetical sketch of the play of these reactions is indispensable in order to conduct such an analysis , far too difficult , incidentally , considering our present possibilities . Some of these reactions are conscious and willed . Every power consciously strives , in proportion to the means at its disposal—a proportion determined by the social organization—to improve production and official control within its own sphere ; history offers many an example of this , from the Pharaohs down to the present day , and it is on this that the notion of enlightened despotism is founded . On the other hand , every power strives also , and again consciously , to destroy among its competitors the means whereby to produce and govern , and is the object on their part of a similar attempt . Thus the struggle for power is at the same time constructive and destructive , and brings about economic progress or decadence , depending on whichever aspect wins the day ; and it is clear that in a given civilization destruction will take place to an extent all the greater the more difficult it is for a power to expand without coming up against rival powers approximately as strong as itself . But the indirect consequences of the exercise of power are far more important than the conscious efforts of the wielders of power . Every power , from the mere fact that it is exercised , extends to the farthest possible limit the social relations on which it is based ; thus military power multiplies wars , commercial capital multiplies exchanges . Now it sometimes happens , through a sort of providential accident , that this extension gives rise , by some mechanism or other , to new resources that make a new extension possible , and so on , more or less in the same way as food strengthens living beings in full process of growth and enables them thus to win still more food so as to acquire still greater strength . All régimes provide examples of such providential accidents ; for without them no form of power could endure , and consequently those powers that benefit from them are the only ones to subsist . Thus war enabled the Romans to carry off slaves , that is to say workers in the prime of life , whom others had had to provide for during childhood ; the profit derived from slave labour made it possible to reinforce the army , and the stronger army undertook more important wars which brought in new and bigger consignments of slaves as booty . Similarly , the roads which the Romans built for military purposes later facilitated the government and exploitation of the conquered provinces , and thus contributed towards storing up resources for future wars . If we turn now to modern times , we see , for example , that the extension of exchanges has brought about a greater division of labour , which in its turn has made a wider circulation of commodities indispensable ; furthermore , the increased productivity which has resulted from this has furnished new resources that have been able to transform themselves into commercial and industrial capital . As far as big industry is concerned , it is clear that each important advance in mechanization has created at the same time resources , instruments and a stimulus towards a further advance . Similarly , it was the technique of big industry which came to provide the means of control and information indispensable to the centralized economy that is the inevitable outcome of big industry , such as the telegraph , the telephone , the daily press . The same may be said with regard to the means of transport . One could find all through history an immense number of similar examples , bearing on the widest and the narrowest aspects of social life . One may define the growth of a system by the fact that all it needs to do is to function in order to create new resources enabling it to function on a larger scale . This phenomenon of automatic development is so striking that one would be tempted to imagine that a happily constituted system , if one may so express it , would go on enduring and progressing endlessly . That is exactly what the nineteenth century , socialists included , imagined with regard to the system of big industry . But if it is easy to imagine in a vague way an oppressive system that would never fall into decadence , it is no longer the same if one wants to conceive clearly and concretely the indefinite extension of a specific power . If it could extend endlessly its means of control , it would tend indefinitely towards a limit which would be something like ubiquity ; if it could extend its resources endlessly , everything would be as though surrounding nature were evolving gradually towards that unqualified abundance from which Adam and Eve benefited in the earthly paradise ; and , finally , if it could extend indefinitely the range of its own instruments—whether it be a question of arms , gold , technical secrets , machines or anything else—it would tend towards abolishing that correlation which , by indissolubly linking together the notions of master and of slave , establishes between master and slave a relationship of mutual dependence . One can not prove that all this is impossible ; but one must assume that it is impossible , or else decide to think of human history as a fairy-tale . In general , one can only regard the world in which we live as subject to laws if one admits that every phenomenon in it is limited ; and it is the same for the phenomenon of power , as Plato had understood . If we want to consider power as a conceivable phenomenon , we must think that it can extend the foundations on which it rests up to a certain point only , after which it comes up , as it were , against an impassable wall . But even so it is not in a position to stop ; the spur of competition forces it to go ever farther and farther , that is to say to go beyond the limits within which it can be effectively exercised . It extends beyond what it is able to control ; it commands over and above what it can impose ; it spends in excess of its own resources . Such is the internal contradiction which every oppressive system carries within itself like a seed of death ; it is made up of the opposition between the necessarily limited character of the material bases of power and the necessarily unlimited character of the race for power considered as relationship between men . For as soon as a power goes beyond the limits assigned to it by the nature of things , it narrows down the bases on which it rests , renders these limits themselves narrower and narrower . By spreading beyond what it is able to control , it breeds a parasitism , a waste , a confusion which , once they have appeared , increase automatically . By attempting to command where actually it is not in a position to compel obedience , it provokes reactions which it can neither foresee nor deal with . Finally , by wishing to spread the exploitation of the oppressed beyond what the objective resources make possible , it exhausts these resources themselves ; this is doubtless what is meant by the ancient and popular tale of the goose with the golden eggs . Whatever may be the sources from whence the exploiters draw the material goods which they appropriate , a day arrives when such and such a method of development , which was at first , as it went on spreading , more and more productive , finally becomes , on the other hand , increasingly costly . That is how the Roman army , which had first of all brought wealth to Rome , ended by ruining it ; that is how the knights of the Middle Ages , whose battles had first of all brought a relative security to the peasants , who found themselves to a certain extent protected against acts of brigandage , ended in the course of their interminable wars by laying waste the countryside which fed them ; and it certainly seems as though capitalism is passing through a phase of this kind . Once more , it can not be proved that it must always be so ; but it has to be assumed , unless the possibility of inexhaustible resources is also assumed . Thus it is the nature itself of things which constitutes that justice-dealing divinity the Greeks worshipped under the name of Nemesis , and which punishes excess . When a specific form of domination finds itself thus arrested in its development and faced with decadence , it does not follow that it begins to disappear progressively ; sometimes it is then , on the contrary , that it becomes most harshly oppressive , that it crushes human beings under its weight , that it grinds down body , heart and spirit without mercy . However , since everyone begins little by little to feel the lack of the resources required by some to maintain their supremacy , by others to live , a time comes when , on every hand , there is a feverish search for expedients . There is no reason why such a search should not remain fruitless ; and in that case the régime can only end by collapsing for want of the means of subsistence and being replaced , not by another and better organised régime , but by a disorder , a poverty , a primitive condition of existence which continue until some new factor or other gives rise to new relationships of force . If it happens otherwise , if the search for new material resources is successful , new patterns of social life arise and a change of régime begins to form slowly and , as it were , subterraneously . Subterraneously , because these new forms can only develop in so far as they are compatible with the established order and do not represent , in appearance at any rate , any danger for the powers that be ; otherwise nothing could prevent these powers from destroying them , as long as they remain the stronger . For the new social patterns to triumph over the old , this continued development must already have brought them to play effectively a more important role in the functioning of the social organism ; in other words , they must have given rise to more powerful forces than those at the disposal of the official authorities . Thus there is never really any break in continuity , not even when the change of régime seems to be the result of a bloody struggle ; for all that victory then does is to sanction forces that , even before the struggle , were the decisive factor in the life of the community , social patterns that had long since begun gradually to replace those on which the declining régime rested . So it was that , under the Roman Empire , the barbarians had begun to occupy the most important posts , the army was disintegrating little by little into armed bands led by adventurers , and the system of military colonies gradually replaced slavery by serfdom—all this long before the great invasions . Similarly , the French bourgeoisie did not by any means wait until 1789 to get the better of the nobility . The Russian Revolution , thanks to a singular conjunction of circumstances , certainly seemed to give rise to something entirely new ; but the truth is that the privileges it abolished had not for a long time rested on any social foundation other than tradition ; that the institutions arising out of the insurrection did not perhaps effectively function for as long as a single morning ; and that the real forces , namely big industry , the police , the army , the bureaucracy , far from being smashed by the Revolution , attained , thanks to it , a power unknown in other countries . Generally speaking , the sudden reversal of the relationship between forces which is what we usually understand by the term “ revolution ” is not only a phenomenon unknown in history , but furthermore , if we examine it closely , something literally inconceivable , for it would be a victory of weakness over force , the equivalent of a balance whose lighter scale were to go down . What history offers us is slow transformations of régimes , in which the bloody events to which we give the name “ revolutions ” play a very secondary role , and from which they may even be absent ; such is the case when the social class which ruled in the name of the old relationships of force manages to keep a part of the power under cover of the new relationships , and the history of England supplies an example . But whatever may be the patterns taken by social transformations , all one finds , if one tries to lay bare the mechanism , is a dreary play of blind forces that unite together or clash , that progress or decline , that replace each other , without ever ceasing to grind beneath them the unfortunate race of human beings . At first sight there seems to be no weak spot in this sinister mesh of circumstances through which an attempt at deliverance might find its way . But it is not from such a vague , abstract and miserably hasty sketch as this that one can claim to draw any conclusion . We must pose once again the fundamental problem , namely , what constitutes the bond which seems hitherto to have united social oppression and progress in the relations between man and nature ? If one considers human development as a whole up to our own time , if , above all , one contrasts primitive tribes , organized practically without inequality , with our present-day civilization , it seems as if man can not manage to lighten the yoke imposed by natural necessities without an equal increase in the weight of that imposed by social oppression , as though by the play of a mysterious equilibrium . And even , what is stranger still , it would seem that if , in fact , the human collectivity has to a large extent freed itself from the crushing burden which the gigantic forces of nature place on frail humanity , it has , on the other hand , taken in some sort nature ’ s place to the point of crushing the individual in a similar manner . What makes primitive man a slave ? The fact that he hardly orders his own activity at all ; he is the plaything of need , which dictates each of his movements or very nearly , and harries him with its relentless spur ; and his actions are regulated not by his own intelligence , but by the customs and caprices—both equally incomprehensible—of a nature that he can but worship with blind submission . If we consider simply the collectivity , men seem nowadays to have raised themselves to a condition that is diametrically the opposite of that servile state . Hardly a single one of their tasks constitutes a mere response to the imperative impulsion of need ; work is accomplished in such a way as to take charge of nature and to organize her so that needs can be satisfied . Humanity no longer believes itself to be in the presence of capricious divinities whose good graces must be won over ; it knows that it has merely to handle inert matter , and acquits itself of this task by methodically following out clearly conceived laws . At last we seem to have reached that epoch predicted by Descartes when men would use “ the force and actions of fire , water , air , the stars and all the other bodies ” in the same way as they do the artisans ’ tools , and would thus make themselves masters of nature . But , by a strange inversion , this collective dominion transforms itself into servitude as soon as one descends to the scale of the individual , and into a servitude fairly closely resembling that associated with primitive conditions of existence . The efforts of the modern worker are imposed on him by a constraint as brutal , as pitiless and which holds him in as tight a grip as hunger does the primitive hunter . From the time of that primitive hunter up to that of the worker in our large factories , passing by way of the Egyptian workers driven by the lash , the slaves of antiquity , the serfs of the Middle Ages constantly threatened by the seigniorial sword , men have never ceased to be goaded to work by some outside force and on pain of almost immediate death . And as for the sequence of movements in work , that , too , is often imposed from outside on our workers , exactly as in the case of primitive men , and is as mysterious for the ones as it was for the others ; what is more , in this respect , the constraint is in certain cases incomparably more brutal today than it has ever been . However tied and bound a primitive man was to routine and blind gropings , he could at least try to think things out , to combine and innovate at his own risk , a liberty which is absolutely denied to a worker engaged in a production line . Lastly , if humanity appears to have reached the stage of controlling those forces of nature which , however , in Spinoza ’ s words , “ infinitely surpass those of mankind ” —and that in almost as sovereign a fashion as a rider controls his horse—that victory does not belong to men taken individually ; only the largest collectivities are in a position to handle “ the force and actions of fire , water , … and all the other bodies that surround us ” ; as for the members of these collectivities , both oppressors and oppressed are alike subjected to the implacable demands of the struggle for power . Thus , in spite of progress , man has not emerged from the servile condition in which he found himself when he was handed over weak and naked to all the blind forces that make up the universe ; it is merely that the power which keeps him on his knees has been as it were transferred from inert matter to the human society of which he is a member . That is why it is this society which is imposed on his worship through all the various forms that religious feeling takes in turn . Hence the social question poses itself in a fairly clear manner ; the mechanism of this transfer must be examined ; we must try to find out why man has had to pay this price for his power over nature ; form an idea of what would constitute the least unhappy position for him to be in , that is to say the one in which he would be the least enslaved to the twin domination of nature and society ; and lastly , discern what roads can lead towards such a position , and what instruments present-day civilization could place in men ’ s hands if they aspired to transform their lives in this way . We accept material progress too easily as a gift of the gods , as something which goes without saying ; we must look fairly and squarely at the conditions at the cost of which it takes place . Primitive life is something easy to understand ; man is spurred on by hunger , or at any rate by the anguished thought that he will soon go hungry , and he sets off in search of food ; he shivers in the cold , or at any rate at the thought that he will soon feel cold , and he goes in search of heat-creating or heat-preserving materials ; and so on . As for the way in which to set about the matter , this is given him in the first place by the habit acquired in childhood of imitating his seniors , and also as a result of the habits which he has given himself in the course of innumerable tentative efforts , by repeating those methods which have succeeded ; when caught off his guard , he continues to proceed by trial and error , spurred on as he is to act by a sharp urge which never leaves him a moment ’ s peace . In all this process , man has only to yield to his own nature , not master it . On the other hand , as soon as we pass to a more advanced stage of civilization , everything becomes miraculous . Men are then found laying by things that are good to consume , desirable things , which they nevertheless go without . They are found giving up to a large extent the search for food , warmth , etc. , and spending the best part of their energy on apparently unprofitable labours . As a matter of fact , most of these labours , far from being unprofitable , are infinitely more profitable than the efforts of primitive man , for they result in an organization of outside nature in a manner favourable to human existence ; but this efficacy is indirect and often separated from the actual effort by so many intermediaries that the mind has difficulty in covering them ; it is a long-term efficacy , often so long-term that it is only future generations which will benefit from it ; while , on the other hand , the utter fatigue , physical pains and dangers connected with these labours are felt immediately , and all the time . Now , everybody knows from his own experience how unusual it is for an abstract idea having a long-term utility to triumph over present pains , needs and desires . It must , however , do so in the matter of social existence , on pain of a regression to a primitive form of life . But what is more miraculous still is the co-ordination of labour . Any reasonably high level of production presupposes a more or less extensive co-operation ; and co-operation shows itself in the fact that the efforts of each one have meaning and efficacy only through their relationship to and exact correspondence with the efforts of all the rest , in such a way that all the efforts together form one single collective piece of work . In other words , the movements of several men must be combined according to the manner in which the movements of a single man are combined . But how can this be done ? A combination can only take place if it is intellectually conceived ; while a relationship is never formed except within one mind . The number 2 thought of by one man can not be added to the number 2 thought of by another man so as to make up the number 4 ; similarly , the idea that one of the cooperators has of the partial work he is carrying out can not be combined with the idea that each of the others has of his respective task so as to form a coherent piece of work . Several human minds can not become united in one collective mind , and the expressions “ collective soul ” , “ collective thought ” , so commonly employed nowadays , are altogether devoid of meaning . Consequently , for the efforts of several to be combined , they all need to be directed by one and the same mind , as the famous line in Faust expresses it : “ One mind is enough for a thousand hands. ” In the egalitarian organization of primitive tribes , it is not possible to solve a single one of these problems , neither that of privation , nor that of incentive to effort , nor that of co-ordination of labour ; on the other hand , social oppression provides an immediate solution , by creating , to put it broadly , two categories of men—those who command and those who obey . The leader co-ordinates without difficulty the efforts of those who are under his orders ; he has no temptation to overcome in order to reduce them to what is strictly necessary ; and as for the stimulus to effort , an oppressive organization is admirably equipped for driving men beyond the limit of their strength , some being whipped by ambition , others , in Homer ’ s words , “ under the goad of a harsh necessity ” . The results are often extraordinary when the division between social categories is deep enough for those who decide what work shall be done never to be exposed to feeling or even knowing about the exhausting fatigue , the pains and the dangers of it , while those who do it and suffer have no choice , being continually under the sway of a more or less disguised menace of death . Thus it is that man escapes to a certain extent from the caprices of blind nature only by handing himself over to the no less blind caprices of the struggle for power . This is never truer than when man reaches—as in our case—a technical development sufficiently advanced to give him the mastery over the forces of nature ; for , in order that this may be so , co-operation has to take place on such a vast scale that the leaders find they have to deal with a mass of affairs which lie utterly beyond their capacity to control . As a result , humanity finds itself as much the plaything of the forces of nature , in the new form that technical progress has given them , as it ever was in primitive times ; we have had , are having , and will continue to have bitter experience of this . As for attempts to preserve technique while shaking off oppression , they at once provoke such laziness and such confusion that those who have engaged in them are more often than not obliged to place themselves again almost immediately under the yoke ; the experiment was tried out on a small scale in the producers ’ co-operatives , on a vast scale at the time of the Russian Revolution . It would seem that man is born a slave , and that servitude is his natural condition . THEORETICAL PICTURE OF A FREE SOCIETY And yet nothing on earth can stop man from feeling himself born for liberty . Never , whatever may happen , can he accept servitude ; for he is a thinking creature . He has never ceased to dream of a boundless liberty , whether as a past state of happiness of which a punishment has deprived him , or as a future state of happiness that is due to him by reason of a sort of pact with some mysterious providence . The communism imagined by Marx is the most recent form this dream has taken . This dream has always remained vain , as is the case with all dreams , or , if it has been able to bring consolation , this has only been in the form of an opium ; the time has come to give up dreaming of liberty , and to make up one ’ s mind to conceive it . Perfect liberty is what we must try to represent clearly to ourselves , not in the hope of attaining it , but in the hope of attaining a less imperfect liberty than is our present condition ; for the better can be conceived only by reference to the perfect . One can only steer towards an ideal . The ideal is just as unattainable as the dream , but differs from the dream in that it concerns reality ; it enables one , as a mathematical limit , to grade situations , whether real or realizable , in an order of value from least to greatest . Perfect liberty can not be conceived as consisting merely in the disappearance of that necessity whose pressure weighs continually upon us ; as long as man goes on existing , that is to say as long as he continues to constitute an infinitesimal fraction of this pitiless universe , the pressure exerted by necessity will never be relaxed for one single moment . A state of things in which man had as much enjoyment and as little fatigue as he liked can , except in fiction , find no place in the world in which we live . It is true that nature is milder or harsher towards human needs according to climate , and perhaps depending on the period ; but to look expectantly for the miraculous invention that would render her mild everywhere , and once and for all , is about as reasonable as the hopes formerly placed in the year 1000 . Besides , if we examine this fiction closely , it does not even seem that it is worth a single regret . We have only to bear in mind the weakness of human nature to understand that an existence from which the very notion of work had pretty well disappeared would be delivered over to the play of the passions and perhaps to madness ; there is no self-mastery without discipline , and there is no other source of discipline for man than the effort demanded in overcoming external obstacles . A nation of idlers might well amuse itself by giving itself obstacles to overcome , exercise itself in the sciences , in the arts , in games ; but the efforts that are the result of pure whim do not form for a man a means of controlling his own whims . It is the obstacles we encounter and that have to be overcome which give us the opportunity for self-conquest . Even the apparently freest forms of activity , science , art , sport , only possess value in so far as they imitate the accuracy , rigour , scrupulousness which characterize the performance of work , and even exaggerate them . Were it not for the model offered them unconsciously by the ploughman , the blacksmith , the sailor who work comme il faut—to use that admirably ambiguous expression—they would sink into the purely arbitrary . The only liberty that can be attributed to the Golden Age is that which little children would enjoy if parents did not impose rules on them ; it is in reality only an unconditional surrender to caprice . The human body can in no case cease to depend on the mighty universe in which it is encased ; even if man were to cease being subjected to material things and to his fellows by needs and dangers , he would only be more completely delivered into their hands by the emotions which would stir him continually to the depths of his soul , and against which no regular occupation would any longer protect him . If one were to understand by liberty the mere absence of all necessity , the word would be emptied of all concrete meaning but it would not then represent for us that which , when we are deprived of it , takes away the value from life . One can understand by liberty something other than the possibility of obtaining without effort what is pleasureable . There exists a very different conception of liberty , an heroic conception which is that of common wisdom . True liberty is not defined by a relationship between desire and its satisfaction , but by a relationship between thought and action ; the absolutely free man would be he whose every action proceeded from a preliminary judgment concerning the end which he set himself and the sequence of means suitable for attaining this end . It matters little whether the actions in themselves are easy or painful , or even whether they are crowned with success ; pain and failure can make a man unhappy , but can not humiliate him as long as it is he himself who disposes of his own capacity for action . And ordering one ’ s own actions does not signify in any way acting arbitrarily ; arbitrary actions do not proceed from any exercise of judgment , and can not properly speaking be called free . Every judgment bears upon an objective set of circumstances , and consequently upon a warp and woof of necessities . Living man can on no account cease to be hemmed in on all sides by an absolutely inflexible necessity ; but since he is a thinking creature , he can choose between either blindly submitting to the spur with which necessity pricks him on from outside , or else adapting himself to the inner representation of it that he forms in his own mind ; and it is in this that the contrast between servitude and liberty lies . The two terms of this contrast are , moreover , but ideal limits between which human life moves without ever being able to reach either , on pain of ceasing any longer to be life . A man would be completely a slave if all his movements proceeded from a source other than his mind , namely , either the irrational reactions of the body , or else the mind of other people ; primitive man , ravenous , his every bound provoked by the spasms tearing at his belly , the Roman slave perpetually keyed up to execute the orders of an overseer armed with a whip , the manual worker of our own day engaged in a production line , all these approach that wretched condition . As for complete liberty , one can find an abstract model of it in a properly solved problem in arithmetic or geometry ; for in a problem all the elements of the solution are given , and man can look for assistance only to his own judgment , alone capable of establishing between these elements the relationship which by itself constitutes the solution sought . The efforts and successes attending mathematics do not go beyond the compass of the sheet of paper , the realm of signs and figures ; a completely free life would be one wherein all real difficulties presented themselves as kinds of problems , wherein all successes were as solutions carried into action . All the elements of success would then be given , that is to say known and able to be handled as are the mathematician ’ s signs ; to obtain the desired result it would be enough to place these elements in relation , thanks to the methodical direction the mind would impart , no longer to mere pen-strokes , but to effective movements that would leave their mark in the world . Or to put it better , the performance of any work whatever would consist in as conscious and as methodical a combination of efforts as can be the combination of numbers by which the solution of a problem is brought about when this solution results from reflection . Man would then have his fate constantly in his own hands ; at each moment he would forge the conditions of his own existence by an act of mind . Mere desire , it is true , would lead him nowhere ; he would receive nothing gratuitously ; and even the possibilities of effective effort would for him be strictly limited . But the very fact of not being able to obtain anything without having brought into action , in order to acquire it , all the powers of mind and body would enable man to tear himself away for good from the blind grip of the passions . A clear view of what is possible and what impossible , what is easy and what difficult , of the labours that separate the project from its accomplishment—this alone does away with insatiable desires and vain fears ; from this and not from anything else proceed moderation and courage , virtues without which life is nothing but a disgraceful frenzy . Besides , the source of any kind of virtue lies in the shock produced by the human intelligence being brought up against a matter devoid of lenience and of falsity . It is not possible to conceive of a nobler destiny for man than that which brings him directly to grips with naked necessity , without his being able to expect anything except through his own exertions , and such that his life is a continual creation of himself by himself . Man is a limited being to whom it is not given to be , as in the case of the God of the theologians , the direct author of his own existence ; but he would possess the human equivalent of that divine power if the material conditions that enable him to exist were exclusively the work of his mind directing the effort of his muscles . This would be true liberty . Such liberty is only an ideal , and can not be found in reality any more than a perfectly straight line can be drawn with a pencil . But it will be useful to conceive this ideal if we can discern at the same time what it is that separates us from it , and what are the circumstances that can cause us to move away from it or approach nearer to it . The first obstacle which appears is formed by the complexity and size of this world with which we have to deal : these infinitely outstrip our mental range . The difficulties of real life do not constitute problems made to our scale ; they are like problems possessing an innumerable quantity of data , for matter is doubly indefinite , from the point of view of extent and from that of divisibility . That is why it is impossible for a human mind to take into account all the factors on which the success of what seems to be the simplest action depends ; any given situation whatever leaves the door open to innumerable chance possibilities , and things escape our mind as water does between the fingers of our cupped hands . Hence it would seem that the mind is only able to exercise itself upon unreal combinations of signs , and that action must be reduced to the blindest form of groping . But , in fact , this is not so . It is true that we can never act with absolute certainty ; but that does not matter so much as one might suppose . We can easily accept the fact that the results of our actions are dependent on accidents outside our control ; what we must at all costs preserve from chance are our actions themselves , and that in such a way as to place them under the control of the mind . To achieve this , all that is necessary is that man should be able to conceive a chain of intermediaries linking the movements he is capable of to the results he wishes to obtain ; and he can often do this , thanks to the relative stability that persists , athwart the blind cross-currents of the universe , on the scale of the human organism , and which alone enables that organism to subsist . It is true that this chain of intermediaries is never anything more than an abstract diagram ; when one starts carrying out the action , accidents can arise at every moment to frustrate the most carefully drawn-up plans ; but if the intelligence has been able clearly to elaborate the abstract plan of the action to be carried out , this means that it has managed , not of course to eliminate chance , but to give it a circumscribed and limited role , and , as it were , to filter it , by classifying with respect to this particular plan the undefined mass of possible accidents in a few clearly-defined series . Thus , the intelligence is powerless to get its bearings amid the innumerable eddies formed by wind and water on the high seas ; but if we place in the midst of these swirling waters a boat whose sails and rudder are fixed in such and such a manner it is possible to draw up a list of the actions which they can cause it to undergo . All tools are thus , in a more or less perfect way , in the manner of instruments for defining chance events . Man could in this way eliminate chance , if not in his surroundings , at any rate within himself ; however , even that is an unattainable ideal . The world is too full of situations whose complexity is beyond us for instinct , routine , trial and error , improvising ever to be able to cease playing a role in our labours ; all man can do is to restrict this role more and more , thanks to scientific and technical progress . What matters is that this role should be subordinate and should not prevent method from constituting the very soul of work . It is also necessary that it should appear as provisional , and that routine and trial and error should always be regarded not as principles of action , but as make-shifts for the purpose of filling up the gaps in methodical conception ; in this scientific hypotheses are a powerful aid by making us conceive half-understood phenomena as governed by laws comparable to those which determine the most clearly understood phenomena . And even in cases where we know nothing at all , we can still assume that similar laws are applicable ; this is sufficient to eliminate , in default of ignorance , the feeling of mystery , and to make us understand that we live in a world in which man has only himself to look to for miracles . There is , however , one source of mystery that we can not eliminate , and which is none other than our own body . The extreme complexity of vital phenomena can perhaps be progressively unravelled , at any rate to a certain extent ; but the immediate relationship linking our thoughts to our movements will always remain wrapped in impenetrable obscurity . In this sphere we can not conceive any form of necessity , from the very fact that we can not determine what are the intermediate links ; moreover , the idea of necessity , as formed in the human mind , is , properly speaking , only applicable to matter . One can not even discover in the phenomena in question , in default of a clearly conceivable necessity , an even approximate regularity . At times the reactions of the living body are completely foreign to the mind ; at other times , but rarely , they simply carry out its orders ; more often they accomplish what the mind has desired without the latter taking any part therein ; often also they accompany the wishes formed in the mind without corresponding to them in any way ; at other times again they precede the mind ’ s thoughts . No classification is possible . That is why , when the movements of the living body play the major role in the struggle against nature , the very notion of necessity can with difficulty take shape ; when these are successful , nature seems to be immediately obeying or complying with desires , and , when unsuccessful , to be rejecting them . This is what takes place in actions accomplished either without instruments or with instruments so well adapted to living members that all they do is to act as an extension of the natural movements of such . We can thus understand how primitive men , in spite of their very great dexterity in accomplishing all they have to do in order to continue to exist , visualize the relationship between man and the world under the aspect not of work but of magic . Between them and the web of necessities which constitutes nature and defines the real conditions of existence , all sorts of mysterious caprices , at whose mercy they believe themselves to be , henceforth interpose themselves in the manner of a screen ; and however little oppressive the society which they form may be , they are none the less its slaves from the point of view of these imaginary caprices , often interpreted , furthermore , by priests and sorcerers of flesh and blood . These beliefs survive in the form of superstitions , and , contrary to what we like to think , no man is completely free from them ; but their spell loses its potency in proportion as , in the struggle against nature , the living body assumes a secondary importance and passive instruments a primary importance . Such is the case when instruments , ceasing to be fashioned according to the structure of the human organism , force the latter , on the contrary , to adapt its movements to their own shape . Thenceforward there is no longer any correspondence between the motions to be carried out and the passions ; the mind has to get away from desire and fear and apply itself solely to establishing an exact relationship between the movements imparted to the instruments and the objective aimed at . The docility of the body in such a case is a kind of miracle , but a miracle which the mind may ignore ; the body , rendered as it were fluid through habit , to use Hegel ’ s beautiful expression , simply causes the movements conceived in the mind to pass into the instruments . The attention is directed exclusively to the combinations formed by the movements of inert matter , and the idea of necessity appears in its purity , without any admixture of magic . For example , on dry land and borne along by the desires and fears that move his legs for him , man often finds that he has passed from one place to another without being aware of it ; on the sea , on the other hand , as desires and fears have no hold over the boat , one has continually to use craft and strategy , set sails and rudder , transmute the thrust of the wind by means of a series of devices which can only be the work of a clear intelligence . You can not entirely reduce the human body to this docile intermediary role between mind and instrument , but you can reduce it more and more to that role ; this is what every technical advance helps to bring about . But , unfortunately , even if you did manage strictly and in full detail to subject all forms of work without exception to methodical thought , a new obstacle to liberty would immediately arise on account of the profound difference in kind which separates theoretical speculation from action . In reality , there is nothing in common between the solution of a problem and the carrying out of an even perfectly methodical piece of work , between the sequence of ideas and the sequence of movements . The man who tackles a difficulty of a theoretical order proceeds by moving from what is simple to what is complex , from what is clear to what is obscure ; the movements of the manual worker , on the other hand , are not some of them clearer and simpler than others , it is merely that those which come before are the condition of those which come after . Moreover , the mind more often than not musters together what execution has to separate , or separates what execution has to link up . That is why , when some piece of work or other presents the mind with difficulties that can not immediately be overcome , it is impossible to combine the examination of these difficulties with the accomplishment of the work ; the mind has first of all to solve the theoretical problem by its own particular methods , and afterwards the solution can be applied to the action . You can not say in such a case that the action is , strictly speaking , methodical ; it is in accordance with method , which is a very different thing . The difference is capital ; for he who applies method has no need to conceive it in his mind at the moment he is applying it . Indeed , if it is a question of something complicated , he is unable to , even should he have elaborated it himself ; for the attention , always forced to concentrate itself on the actual moment of execution , can not embrace at the same time the series of relationships on which execution as a whole depends . Hence , what is carried out is not a conception but an abstract diagram indicating a sequence of movements , and as little penetrable by the mind , at the moment of execution , as is some formula resulting from mere routine or some magic rite . Moreover , one and the same conception is applicable , with or without modifications of detail , an indefinite number of times ; for although the mind embraces at one stroke the series of possible applications of a given method , man is not thereby absolved from realizing them one by one every time that it is necessary . Thus for one single flash of thought there are an unlimited number of blind actions . It goes without saying that those who go on applying indefinitely such and such a method of work have often never given themselves the trouble of understanding it ; furthermore , it frequently happens that each of them is only charged with a part of the job of execution , always the same , while his companions do the rest . Hence one is brought face to face with a paradoxical situation ; namely , that there is method in the motions of work , but none in the mind of the worker . It would seem as though the method had transferred its abode from the mind into the matter . Automatic machines present the most striking image of this . From the moment when the mind which has worked out a method of action has no need to take part in the job of execution , this can be handed over to pieces of metal just as well as and better than to living members ; and one is thus presented with the strange spectacle of machines in which the method has become so perfectly crystallized in metal that it seems as though it is they which do the thinkng , and it is the men who serve them who are reduced to the condition of automata . Indeed , this contrast between the application and the understanding of the method is found again , in absolutely identical form , in the realm of pure theory itself . To take a simple example , it is absolutely impossible , at the moment when one is working out a difficult division sum , to have the theory of division present to the mind ; and that is so not only because this theory , which is based on the relationship of division to multiplication , is of a certain complexity , but above all because when carrying out each of the partial operations at the end of which the division is accomplished , one forgets that the numbers represent now units , now tens , now hundreds . The signs combine together according to the laws governing the things which they signify ; but , for want of being able to keep the relationship of sign to thing signified continually present to the mind , one handles them as though they combined together according to their own laws ; and as a result the combinations become unintelligible , which means to say that they take place automatically . The mechanical nature of arithmetical operations is exemplified by the existence of calculating machines ; but an accountant , too , is nothing else but an imperfect and unhappy calculating machine . Mathematics only progress by working in signs , by widening their significance , by creating signs of signs ; thus the ordinary letters in algebra represent arbitrary quantities , or even virtual operations , as is the case with negative values ; other letters stand for algebraic functions , and so on . As at each floor—if one may so express it—one inevitably loses sight of the relationship between sign and thing signified , the combinations of signs , although they remain rigorously methodical , very soon become impenetrable to the mind . No satisfactory algebraic machine exists , although several attempts have been made in this direction ; but algebraic calculations are none the less more often than not as automatic as the work of an accountant . Or rather , they are more so in the sense that they are , in a way , essentially so . After working out a division , one can always ponder over it , while giving back the signs their significance , until one has understood the reason for each part of the operation ; but it is not the same thing in algebra , where the signs , as a result of being handled and combined together as such , end by displaying an efficacy which their significance does not account for . Such are , for example , the signs e and i ; by handling them suitably , one can smooth out all sorts of difficulties in a marvellous manner , and in particular if they are combined in a certain way with π , one arrives at the assertion that the squaring of the circle is impossible ; and yet no mind in the world can conceive what connection the quantities—if one may call them such—that these letters designate can have with the problem of the squaring of the circle . The process of calculation places the signs in relation to one another on the sheet of paper , without the objects so signified being in relation in the mind ; with the result that the actual question of the significance of signs ends by no longer possessing any meaning . One thus finds oneself in the position of having solved a problem by a species of magic , without the mind having connected the data with the solution . Consequently , here again , as in the case of the automatic machine , method seems to have material objects as its sphere instead of mind ; only , in this case , the material objects are not pieces of metal , but marks made on white paper . Which is why a certain scientist was able to say : “ My pencil knows more than I do. ” It is obvious , of course , that higher mathematics are not a pure product of automatism , and that mind and even genius have played and play a part in their elaboration ; the result is an extraordinary mixture of blind operations coupled with flashes of understanding ; but where the mind can not embrace everything , it must necessarily play a subordinate role . And the more scientific progress accumulates ready-made combinations of signs , the more the mind is weighed down , made powerless to draw up an inventory of the ideas which it handles . Of course , the connection between the formulas thus worked out and the practical applications of them is often itself , too , completely impenetrable to the mind , with the result that it appears as fortuitous as the efficacy of a magic formula . In such a case work finds itself automatic , as it were , to the second power ; it is not simply the execution , it is also the elaboration of the method of work which takes place outside the control of the mind . One might conceive , as an abstract limit , of a civilization in which all human activity , in the sphere of labour as in that of speculative theory , was subjected right down to matters of detail to an altogether mathematical strictness , and that without a single human being understanding anything at all about what he was doing ; the idea of necessity would then be absent from everybody ’ s mind , and in far more radical fashion than it is among primitive tribes which , our sociologists affirm , are ignorant of logic . As opposed to this , the only mode of production absolutely free would be that in which methodical thought was in operation throughout the course of the work . The difficulties to be overcome would have to be so varied that it would never be possible to apply ready-made rules ; not of course that the part played by acquired knowledge should be nil ; but it is necessary that the worker should be obliged always to bear in mind the guiding principle behind the work in hand , so as to be able to apply it intelligently to ever-new sets of circumstances . The condition naturally governing such a presence of mind is that the fluidity of the body produced by habit and skill should reach a very high degree . All the ideas employed in the course of the work must also be sufficiently luminous to be able to be called up in their entirety in the twinkling of an eye ; whether the memory is capable of retaining the idea itself or simply the formula that served to enshrine it depends on a greater or lesser adaptability of mind , but even more on the more or less direct means whereby an idea has taken shape in the mind . Furthermore , it goes without saying that the degree of complexity of the difficulties to be solved must never be too great , on pain of bringing about a split between thought and action . Naturally , such an ideal can never be fully realized ; one can not avoid , in the practical affairs of life , carrying out actions which it is impossible to understand at the moment when they are being carried out , because one has to rely either on ready-made rules or else on instinct , trial and error , routine . But one can at any rate widen bit by bit the sphere of conscious work , and perhaps indefinitely so . To achieve this end it would be enough if man were no longer to aim at extending his knowledge and power indefinitely , but rather at establishing , both in his research and in his work , a certain balance between the mind and the object to which it is being applied . But there is still another factor making for servitude ; it is , in the case of each man , the existence of other men . And indeed , when we look into it more closely , it is , strictly speaking , the only factor ; man alone can enslave man . Even primitive men would not be the slaves of nature if they did not people her with imaginary beings comparable to man , whose wills are , furthermore , interpreted by men . In this case , as in all the others , it is the outside world that is the source of power ; but if behind the infinite forces of nature there did not lie , whether as a result of fiction or in reality , divine or human wills , nature could break man , but she could not humiliate him . Matter can give the lie to expectations and ruin efforts , it remains none the less inert , made to be understood and handled from the outside ; but the human mind can never be understood or handled from the outside . To the extent to which a man ’ s fate is dependent on other men , his own life escapes not only out of his hands , but also out of the control of his intelligence ; judgment and resolution no longer have anything to which to apply themselves ; instead of contriving and acting , one has to stoop to pleading or threatening ; and the soul is plunged into bottomless abysses of desire and fear , for there are no bounds to the satisfactions and sufferings that a man can receive at the hands of other men . This degrading dependence is not the characteristic of the oppressed only ; it is for the same reason , though in different ways , that of both the oppressed and the powerful . As the man of power lives only by his slaves , the existence of an inexorable world escapes him almost entirely ; his orders seem to him to contain within themselves some mysterious efficacy ; he is never capable , strictly speaking , of willing , but is a prey to desires to which the clear perception of necessity never comes to assign any limit . Since he can not conceive of any other mode of action than that of commanding , when he happens , as he inevitably does , to issue commands in vain , he passes all of a sudden from the feeling of absolute power to that of utter impotence , as often happens in dreams ; and his fears are then all the more overwhelming in that he feels himself continually threatened by his rivals . As for the slaves , they are continually striving with material elements ; only their lot does not depend on these material elements which they handle , but on masters whose whims are unaccountable and insatiable . But it would still be a small matter to be dependent on other beings who , although strangers , are at any rate real and whom one can , if not penetrate , at least see , hear , divine by analogy with oneself . Actually , in all oppressive societies , any man , whatever his rank may be , is dependent not only on those above or below him , but above all on the very play of collective life—a blind play which alone determines the social hierarchies ; and it does not matter much in this respect whether power allows its essentially collective origin to appear or else seems to reside in certain specific individuals after the manner of the dormitive virtue in opium . Now , if there is one thing in the world which is completely abstract , wholly mysterious , inaccessible to the senses and to the mind , it is the collectivity ; the individual who is a member of it can not , it would seem , reach up to or lay hold of it by any artifice , bring his weight to bear on it by the use of any lever ; with respect to it he feels himself to be something infinitely small . If an individual ’ s caprices seem arbitrary to everybody else , the shocks produced by collective life seem to be so to the second power . Thus between man and this universe which is assigned to him by destiny as the sole matter of his thoughts and actions , the relation oppression-servitude permanently sets the impenetrable screen of human arbitrariness . Why be surprised , then , if instead of ideas one encounters little but opinions , instead of action a blind agitation ? One could only visualize the possibility of any progress in the true sense of the word , that is to say progress in the order of human values , if one could conceive as an ideal limit a society which armed man against the world without separating him from it . Man is not made to be the plaything of the blind collectivities that he forms with his fellows , any more than he is made to be the plaything of a blind nature ; but in order to cease being delivered over to society as passively as a drop of water is to the sea , he would have to be able both to understand and to act upon it . In all spheres , it is true , collective strength infinitely surpasses individual strength ; thus you can no more easily conceive of an individual managing even a portion of the collective life than you can of a line extending itself by the addition of a point . Such , at any rate , is the appearance ; but in reality there is one exception and one only , namely , the sphere of the mind . In the case of the mind , the relation is reversed ; here the individual surpasses the collectivity to the same extent as something surpasses nothing , for thought only takes shape in a mind that is alone face to face with itself ; collectivities do not think . It is true that mind by no means constitutes a force by itself . Archimedes was killed , so it is said , by a drunken soldier ; and if he had been made to turn a millstone under the lash of a slave-overseer , he would have turned it in exactly the same manner as the most dull-witted man . To the extent to which the mind soars above the social mêlée , it can judge , but it can not transform . All forms of force are material ; the expression “ spiritual force ” is essentially contradictory ; mind can only be a force to the extent to which it is materially indispensable . To express the same idea under another aspect , man has nothing essentially individual about him , nothing which is absolutely his own , apart from the faculty of thinking , and this society on which he is in close dependence every minute of his existence depends in its turn a little on him from the moment his thinking is necessary to it . For all the rest can be imposed from outside by force , including bodily movements , but nothing in the world can compel a man to exercise his powers of thought , nor take away from him the control over his own mind . If you require a slave to think , the lash had better be put away ; otherwise you will run very little chance of obtaining high-quality results . Thus , if we wish to form , in a purely theoretical way , the conception of a society in which collective life would be subject to men as individuals instead of subjecting them to itself , we must visualize a form of material existence wherein only efforts exclusively directed by a clear intelligence would take place , which would imply that each worker himself had to control , without referring to any external rule , not only the adaptation of his efforts to the piece of work to be produced , but also their co-ordination with the efforts of all the other members of the collectivity . The technique would have to be such as to make continual use of methodical thought ; the analogy between the techniques employed in the various tasks would have to be sufficiently close , and technical education sufficiently widespread , to enable each worker to form a clear idea of all the specialized procedures ; coordination would have to be arranged in sufficiently simple a manner to enable each one continually to have a precise knowledge of it , as concerns both co-operation between workers and exchange of products ; collectivities would never be sufficiently vast to pass outside the range of a human mind ; community of interests would be sufficiently patent to abolish competitive attitudes ; and as each individual would be in a position to exercise control over the collective life as a whole , the latter would always be in accordance with the general will . Privileges founded upon the exchange of products , secrets of production or co-ordination of labour would automatically be done away with . The function of co-ordinating would no longer imply power , since a continual check exercised by each individual would render any arbitrary decision impossible . Generally speaking , men ’ s dependence with regard to one another would no longer imply that their fate rested in the hands of arbitrary factors , and would cease to introduce into human life any mysterious element whatever , since each would be in a position to verify the activities of all the rest by using his own reason . There is but one single and identical reason for all men ; they only become estranged from and impenetrable to each other when they depart from it ; thus a society in which the whole of material existence had as its necessary and sufficient condition that each individual should exercise his reason could be absolutely clearly understood by each individual mind . As for the stimulus necessary to overcome fatigue , sufferings and dangers , each would find it in the desire to win the esteem of his fellows , but even more so in himself ; in the case of creative work by the mind , outward constraint , having become useless and harmful , is replaced by a sort of inward constraint ; the sight of the unfinished task attracts the free man as powerfully as the over-seer ’ s whip stimulates the slave . Such a society alone would be a society of men free , equal and brothers . Men would , it is true , be bound by collective ties , but exclusively in their capacity as men ; they would never be treated by each other as things . Each would see in every work-fellow another self occupying another post , and would love him in the way that the Gospel maxim enjoins . Thus we should possess , over and above liberty , a still more precious good ; for if nothing is more odious than the humiliation and degradation of man by man , nothing is so beautiful or so sweet as friendship . The above picture , considered by itself , is , if possible , still farther removed from the actual conditions of human existence than is the fiction of a Golden Age . But , unlike that fiction , it is able to serve , by way of an ideal , as a standard for the analysis and evaluation of actual social patterns . The picture of a completely oppressive social life where every individual is subject to the operation of a blind mechanism was also purely theoretical ; an analysis which situated a society with respect to these two pictures would already come much closer to reality , while still remaining very abstract . There thus emerges a new method of social analysis which is not that of Marx , although it starts , as Marx wanted , from the relationships of production ; but whereas Marx , whose conception is in any case not very precise on this point , seems to have wanted to classify the modes of production in terms of output , these would be analysed in terms of the relationships between thought and action . It goes without saying that such a point of view in no way implies that humanity has evolved , in the course of history , from the least conscious to the most conscious forms of production ; the idea of progress is indispensable for whoever seeks to design the future in advance , but it can only lead the mind astray when it is the past that is being studied . We must then replace it by the idea of a scale of values conceived outside time ; but it is not possible , either , to arrange the various social patterns in serial order according to such a scale . What one can do is to refer to this scale such and such an aspect of social life , taken at a given period . It is clear enough that one kind of work differs substantially from another by reason of something which has nothing to do with welfare , or leisure , or security , and yet which claims each man ’ s devotion ; a fisherman battling against wind and waves in his little boat , although he suffers from cold , fatigue , lack of leisure and even of sleep , danger and a primitive level of existence , has a more enviable lot than the manual worker on a production-line , who is nevertheless better off as regards nearly all these matters . That is because his work resembles far more the work of a free man , despite the fact that routine and blind improvisation sometimes play a fairly large part in it . The craftsman of the Middle Ages also occupies , from this point of view , a fairly honourable position , although the “ tricks of the trade ” which play so large a part in all work carried out by hand are to a great extent something blind ; as for the fully skilled worker , trained in modern technical methods , he perhaps resembles most closely the perfect workman . Similar differences are found in collective action ; a team of workers on a production-line under the eye of a foreman is a sorry spectacle , whereas it is a fine sight to see a handful of workmen in the building trade , checked by some difficulty , ponder the problem each for himself , make various suggestions for dealing with it , and then apply unanimously the method conceived by one of them , who may or may not have any official authority over the remainder . At such moments the image of a free community appears almost in its purity . As for the relationship between the nature of the work and the condition of the worker , that , too , is clearly apparent , as soon as one takes a look at history or at our present-day society ; even the slaves of antiquity were treated with consideration when they were employed as physicians or as pedagogues . However , all these remarks are still concerned only with details . A method enabling one to reach general views concerning the various modes of social organization in terms of the ideas of servitude and of liberty would be more valuable . It would first of all be necessary to draw up something like a map of social life , a map indicating the spots where it is indispensable that thought should be exercised , and consequently , if one may so express it , the individual ’ s zones of influence over society . It is possible to distinguish three ways in which thought can play a part in social life ; it can formulate purely theoretical speculations , the results of which will afterwards be applied by technicians ; it can be exercised in execution ; it can be exercised in command and management . In all these cases , it is only a question of a partial and , as it were , maimed exercise of thought , since the mind is never able fully to embrace its object ; but it is enough to ensure that those who are obliged to think when they are discharging their social function preserve the human aspect better than others . This is true not only for the oppressed , but also for all degrees of the social scale . In a society founded on oppression , it is not only the weak but also the most powerful who are bond-slaves to the blind demands of collective life , and in each case heart and mind suffer a diminution , though in different ways . If we compare two oppressive social strata such as , for example , the citizens of Athens and the Soviet bureaucracy , we find a distance between them at least as great as that between one of our skilled workmen and a Greek slave . As for the conditions under which thought plays a greater or lesser part in the exercise of power , it would be easy to tabulate them according to the degree of complexity and range of business , the general nature of the difficulties to be solved and the allocation of functions . Thus the members of an oppressive society are not only distinguished according to the higher or lower position in the social mechanism to which they cling , but also by the more conscious or more passive character of their relationship with it , and this second distinction—the more important of the two—has no direct connection with the first . As for the influence that men charged with social functions subject to the control of their own intelligence can exercise on the society of which they form a part , that depends , of course , on the nature and importance of these functions ; it would be very interesting , but also very difficult , to carry out a detailed analysis with regard to this point . Another very important factor in the relations between social oppression and individuals arises from the more or less extensive powers of control that can be exercised over the various functions essentially concerned in co-ordinating by men who are not themselves invested with such powers ; it is obvious that the more these functions can not be controlled , the more crushing collective life becomes for the general body of individuals . Finally , one must bear in mind the nature of the ties which keep the individual in material dependence upon the society surrounding him ; at times these ties are looser , at other times tighter , and considerable differences may be found at this point , according to whether a man is more or less forced , at every moment of his existence , to address himself to others in order to have the wherewithal to live , the wherewithal to produce , and to protect himself from outside danger . For example , a workman who has a large enough garden to supply himself with vegetables is more independent than those of his comrades who have to get all their food from the shopkeepers ; an artisan who has his own tools is more independent than a factory worker whose hands become useless as soon as it pleases the boss to stop him from working his machine . As for protection against danger , the individual ’ s position in this respect depends on the method of warfare practised by the society in which he finds himself ; where fighting is the monopoly of those belonging to a certain social stratum , the security of everybody else depends on these privileged persons ; where the destructive power of armaments and the collective nature of warfare give the central government the monopoly of military force , that government disposes of the security of the citizens as it likes . To sum up , the least evil society is that in which the general run of men are most often obliged to think while acting , have the most opportunities for exercising control over collective life as a whole , and enjoy the greatest amount of independence . Furthermore , the necessary conditions for diminishing the oppressive weight of the social mechanism run counter to each other as soon as certain limits are overstepped ; thus the thing to do is not to proceed forward as far as possible in a specific direction , but , what is much more difficult , to discover a certain optimum balance . The purely negative idea of a lessening of social oppression can not by itself provide an objective for people of good will . It is indispensable to form at any rate a vague mental picture of the sort of civilization one wishes humanity to reach ; and it matters little if this mental picture is derived more from mere reverie than from real thought . If the foregoing analyses are correct , the most fully human civilization would be that which had manual labour as its pivot , that in which manual labour constituted the supreme value . It is not a question of anything comparable to the religion of production which reigned in America during the period of prosperity , and has reigned in Russia since the Five Year Plan ; for the true object of that religion is the product of work and not the worker , material objects and not man . It is not in relation to what it produces that manual labour must become the highest value , but in relation to the man who performs it ; it must not be made the object of honours and rewards , but must constitute for each human being what he is most essentially in need of if his life is to take on of itself a meaning and a value in his own eyes . Even in these days , so-called disinterested activities , such as sport or even art or even thought , do not succeed in giving perhaps the equivalent of what one experiences in getting directly to grips with the world by means of non-mechanized labour . Rimbaud complained that “ we are not in the world ” and that “ true life is absent ” ; in those moments of incomparable joy and fullness we know by flashes that true life is there at hand , we feel with all our being that the world exists and that we are in the world . Even physical fatigue can not lessen the strength of this feeling , but rather , as long as it is not excessive , augments it . If this can be so in our day , what wonderful fullness of life could we not expect from a civilization in which labour would be sufficiently transformed to exercise fully all the faculties , to form the human act par excellence ? It would then of necessity be at the very centre of culture . At one time culture was considered by many as an end in itself , and in our days those who see more in it than just a hobby usually look to it as a means of escape from real life . Its true value should consist , on the contrary , in preparing for real life , in equipping man so that he may maintain , both with this universe which is his portion and with his fellows whose condition is identical to his own , relations worthy of the greatness of humanity . Science is today regarded by some as a mere catalogue of technical recipes , by others as a body of pure intellectual speculations which are sufficient unto themselves ; the former set too little value on the intellect , the latter on the world . Thought is certainly man ’ s supreme dignity ; but it is exercised in a vacuum , and consequently only in appearance , when it does not seize hold of its object , which can be none other than the universe . Now what gives the abstract speculations of the scientists that connection with the universe which alone can invest them with a concrete value , is the fact that they are directly or indirectly applicable . In our days , it is true , their own applications remain unknown to them ; while those who elaborate or study those speculations do so without considering their theoretical value . At least that is more often than not the case . On the day when it became impossible to understand scientific notions , even the most abstract , without clearly perceiving at the same time their connection with possible applications , and equally impossible to apply such notions even indirectly without thoroughly knowing and understanding them—on that day science would have become concrete and labour would have become conscious ; and then only will each possess its full value . Until that time comes , there will always be something incomplete and inhuman about science and labour . Those who have so far maintained that applications are the goal of science meant to say that truth is not worth seeking and that success alone counts ; but it could be understood differently ; one can conceive of a science whose ultimate aim would be the perfecting of technique not by rendering it more powerful , but simply more conscious and more methodical . Besides , output might well increase in proportion with clear thinking ; “ seek ye first the kingdom of God … and all these things shall be added unto you ” . Such a science would be , in effect , a method for mastering nature , or a catalogue of concepts indispensable for attaining to such mastery , arranged according to an order that would make them palpably clear to the mind . Presumably Descartes conceived science after this fashion . As for the art of such a civilization , it would crystallize in its works the expression of that happy balance between mind and body , between man and the universe , which can exist in action only in the noblest forms of physical labour ; moreover , even in the past , the purest works of art have always expressed the sentiment , or , to speak perhaps with greater precision , the presentiment of such a balance . The essential aim of sport would be to give the human body that suppleness and , as Hegel says , that fluidity which renders it pervious to thought and enables the latter to enter directly into contact with material objects . Social relations would be directly modelled upon the organization of labour ; men would group themselves in small working collectivities , where co-operation would be the sovereign law , and where each would be able to understand clearly and to verify the connection between the rules to which his life was subjected and the public interest . Moreover , every moment of existence would afford each the opportunity to understand and to feel how profoundly all men are one , since they all have to bring one same reason to bear on similar obstacles ; and all human relations , from the most superficial to the very tenderest , would have about them something of that manly and brotherly feeling which forms the bond between workmates . No doubt all this is purely utopian . But to give even a summary description of a state of things which would be better than what actually exists is always to build a utopia ; yet nothing is more necessary to our life than such descriptions , provided it is always reason that is responsible for them . The whole of modern thought since the Renaissance is , moreover , impregnated with more or less vague aspirations towards such a utopian civilization ; for some time it was even thought that this civilization was beginning to take shape , and that men were entering upon a period when Greek geometry would descend upon earth . Descartes certainly believed this , as also did some of his contemporaries . Furthermore , the idea of labour considered as a human value is doubtless the one and only spiritual conquest achieved by the human mind since the miracle of Greece ; this was perhaps the only gap in the ideal of human life elaborated by Greece and left behind by her as an undying heritage . Bacon was the first to put forward this idea . For the ancient and heart-breaking curse contained in Genesis , which made the world appear as a convict prison and labour as the sign of men ’ s servitude and abasement , he substituted in a flash of genius the veritable charter expressing the relations between man and the world : “ We can not command Nature except by obeying her. ” This simple pronouncement ought to form by itself the Bible of our times . It suffices to define true labour , the kind which forms free men , and that to the very extent to which it is an act of conscious submission to necessity . After Descartes , scientists progressively slipped into considering pure science as an end in itself ; but the ideal of a life devoted to some free form of physical labour began , on the other hand , to be perceived by writers ; and it even dominates the masterpiece of the poet usually regarded as the most aristocratic of all , namely , Goethe . Faust , a symbol of the human soul in its untiring pursuit of the good , abandons with disgust the abstract search for truth , which has become in his eyes an empty and barren occupation ; love merely leads him to destroy the loved one ; political and military power reveals itself as nothing but a game of appearances ; the meeting with beauty fulfils his dreams , but only for the space of a second ; his position as industrial leader gives him a power which he believes to be substantial , but which nevertheless delivers him up to the tyranny of the passions . Finally , he longs to be stripped of his magic power , which can be regarded as the symbol of all forms of power , and he exclaims : “ If I could stand before thee , Nature , simply as a man , then it would be worth while being a human creature ” ; and he ends by having , at the moment of death , a foretaste of the most complete happiness , by representing to himself a life spent freely among a free people and entirely taken up by hard and dangerous physical labour , which would , however , be carried out in the midst of brotherly co-operation . It would be easy to cite yet other famous names , amongst them Rousseau , Shelley and , above all , Tolstoy , who developed this theme throughout the whole of his work in matchless accents . As for the working-class movement , every time it has managed to escape from demagogy , it is on the dignity of labour that it has based the workers ’ demands . Proudhon dared to write : “ The genius of the humblest artisan is as much superior to the materials with which he works as is the mind of a Newton to the lifeless spheres whose distances , masses and revolutions he calculates. ” Marx , whose work contains a good many contradictions , set down as man ’ s essential characteristic , as opposed to the animals , the fact that he produces the conditions of his own existence and thus himself indirectly produces himself . The revolutionary syndicalists , who place at the core of the social problem the dignity of the producer as such , are linked up with the same current of ideas . On the whole , we may feel proud to belong to a civilization which has brought with it the presage of a new ideal . SKETCH OF CONTEMPORARY SOCIAL LIFE It is impossible to imagine anything more contrary to this ideal than the form which modern civilization has assumed in our day , at the end of a development lasting several centuries . Never has the individual been so completely delivered up to a blind collectivity , and never have men been less capable , not only of subordinating their actions to their thoughts , but even of thinking . Such terms as oppressors and oppressed , the idea of classes—all that sort of thing is near to losing all meaning , so obvious are the impotence and distress of all men in face of the social machine , which has become a machine for breaking hearts and crushing spirits , a machine for manufacturing irresponsibility , stupidity , corruption , slackness and , above all , dizziness . The reason for this painful state of affairs is perfectly clear . We are living in a world in which nothing is made to man ’ s measure ; there exists a monstrous discrepancy between man ’ s body , man ’ s mind and the things which at the present time constitute the elements of human existence ; everything is disequilibrium . There is not a single category , group or class of men that is altogether exempt from this destructive disequilibrium , except perhaps for a few isolated patches of more primitive life ; and the younger generation , who have grown and are growing up in it , inwardly reflect the chaos surrounding them more than do their elders . This disequilibrium is essentially a matter of quantity . Quantity is changed into quality , as Hegel said , and in particular a mere difference in quantity is sufficient to change what is human into what is inhuman . From the abstract point of view quantities are immaterial , since you can arbitrarily change the unit of measurement ; but from the concrete point of view certain units of measurement are given and have hitherto remained invariable , such as the human body , human life , the year , the day , the average quickness of human thought . Present-day life is not organized on the scale of all these things ; it has been transported into an altogether different order of magnitude , as though man were trying to raise it to the level of the forces of outside nature while neglecting to take his own nature into account . If we add that , to all appearances , the economic system has exhausted its constructive capacity and is beginning to be able to function only by undermining little by little its own material foundations , we shall perceive in all its simplicity the veritable essence of the bottomless misery that forms the lot of the present generations . In appearance , nearly everything nowadays is carried out methodically ; science is king , machinery invades bit by bit the entire field of labour , statistics take on a growing importance , and over one-sixth of the globe the central authority is trying to regulate the whole of social life according to plans . But in reality methodical thought is progressively disappearing , owing to the fact that the mind finds less and less matter on which to bite . Mathematics by itself forms too vast and too complex a whole to be embraced by one mind ; a fortiori the whole formed by mathematics and the natural sciences ; a fortiori the whole formed by science and its applications ; and , on the other hand , everything is too intimately connected for the mind to be able really to grasp partial concepts . Now everything that the individual becomes powerless to control is seized upon by the collectivity . Thus science has now been for a long time—and to an ever-increasing extent—a collective enterprise . Actually , new results are always , in fact , the work of specific individuals ; but , save perhaps for rare exceptions , the value of any result depends on such a complex set of interrelations with past discoveries and possible future researches that even the mind of the inventor can not embrace the whole . Consequently , new discoveries , as they go on accumulating , take on the appearance of enigmas , after the style of too thick a glass which ceases to be transparent . A fortiori practical life takes on a more and more collective character , and the individual as such a more and more insignificant place in it . Technical progress and mass production reduce manual workers more and more to a passive role ; in increasing proportion and to an ever greater extent they arrive at a form of labour that enables them to carry out the necessary movements without understanding their connection with the final result . On the other hand , an industrial concern has become something too vast and too complex for any one man to be able to grasp it fully ; and furthermore , in all spheres , the men who occupy key posts in social life are in charge of matters which are far beyond the compass of any single human mind . As for the general body of social life , it depends on so many factors , each of which is impenetrably obscure and which are tangled up in inextricable relations with one another , that it would never even occur to anyone to try to understand its mechanism . Thus the social function most essentially connected with the individual , that which consists in co-ordinating , managing , deciding , is beyond any individual ’ s capacity and becomes to a certain extent collective and , as it were , anonymous . To the very extent to which what is systematic in contemporary life escapes the control of the mind , its regularity is established by things which constitute the equivalent of what collective thought would be if the collectivity did think . The cohesiveness of science is ensured by means of signs ; namely , on the one hand , by words or ready-made phrases whose use is stretched beyond the meanings originally contained in them , on the other hand , by algebraic calculations . In the sphere of labour , the things which take upon themselves the essential functions are machines . The thing which relates production to consumption and governs the exchange of products is money . Finally , where the function of co-ordination and management is too heavy for the mind and intelligence of one man , it is entrusted to a curious machine , whose parts are men , whose gears consist of regulations , reports and statistics , and which is called bureaucratic organization . All these blind things imitate the effort of thought to the life . Just the mechanism of algebraic calculation has led more than once to what might be called a new idea , except that the content of such pseudo-ideas is no more than that of relations between signs ; and algebra is often marvellously apt to transform a series of experimental results into laws , with a disconcerting ease reminding one of the fantastic transformations one sees in motion-picture cartoons . Automatic machines seem to offer the model for the intelligent , faithful , docile and conscientious worker . As for money , economists have long been convinced that it possesses the virtue of establishing harmonious relations between the various economic functions . And bureaucratic machines almost reach the point of taking the place of leaders . Thus , in all spheres , thought , the prerogative of the individual , is subordinated to vast mechanisms which crystallize collective life , and that is so to such an extent that we have almost lost the notion of what real thought is . The efforts , the labours , the inventions of beings of flesh and blood whom time introduces in successive waves to social life only possess social value and effectiveness on condition that they become in their turn crystallized in these huge mechanisms . The inversion of the relation between means and ends—an inversion which is to a certain extent the law of every oppressive society—here becomes total or nearly so , and extends to nearly everything . The scientist does not use science in order to manage to see more clearly into his own thinking , but aims at discovering results that will go to swell the present volume of scientific knowledge . Machines do not run in order to enable men to live , but we resign ourselves to feeding men in order that they may serve the machines . Money does not provide a convenient method for exchanging products ; it is the sale of goods which is a means for keeping money in circulation . Lastly , organization is not a means for exercising a collective activity , but the activity of a group , whatever it may be , is a means for strengthening organization . Another aspect of the same inversion consists in the fact that signs , words and algebraic formulas in the field of knowledge , money and credit symbols in economic life , play the part of realities of which the actual things themselves constitute only the shadows , exactly as in Hans Andersen ’ s tale in which the scientist and his shadow exchanged roles ; this is because signs constitute the material of social relations , whereas the perception of reality is something individual . The dispossession of the individual in favour of the collectivity is not , indeed , absolute , and it can not become so ; but it is hard to imagine how it could go much farther than at present . The power and concentration of armaments place all human lives at the mercy of the central authority . As a result of the vast extension of exchange , the majority of men can not procure for themselves the greater part of what they consume save through the medium of society and in return for money ; the peasants themselves are today to a large extent under this obligation to buy . And as big industry is a system of collective production , a great many men are forced , in order that their hands may come into contact with the material of work , to go through a collectivity which swallows them up and pins them down to a more or less servile task ; when it rejects them , the strength and skill of their hands remain useless . The very peasants , who hitherto had managed to escape this wretched condition , have been reduced to it of late over one-sixth of the globe . Such a stifling state of affairs certainly provokes here and there an individualistic reaction ; art , and especially literature , bears the marks of it ; but since , owing to objective conditions , this reaction can not impinge on either the sphere of thought or that of action , it remains bottled up in the play of the inner consciousness or in dreams of adventure and gratuitous acts , in other words , it never leaves the realm of shadows ; and everything leads one to suppose that even this shadowy reaction is doomed to disappear almost completely . When man reaches this degree of enslavement , judgments of value can only be based , whatever the particular field may be , on a purely external criterion ; language does not possess any term so foreign to thought as properly to express something so devoid of meaning ; but we may say that this criterion is constituted by efficiency , provided we thereby understand successes obtained in a vacuum . Even a scientific concept is not valued according to its content , which may be completely unintelligible , but according to the opportunities it provides for co-ordinating , abbreviating , summarizing . In the economic field , an undertaking is judged , not according to the real utility of the social functions it fulfils , but according to its growth so far and the speed with which it is developing ; and the same is true of everything . Thus judgment of values is as it were entrusted to material objects instead of to the mind . The efficacy of efforts of whatever kind must always , it is true , be verified by thought , for , generally speaking , all verification proceeds from the mind ; but thought has been reduced to such a subordinate role that one may say , by way of simplification , that the function of verification has passed from thought to things . But this excessive complication of all theoretical and practical activities which has thus dethroned thought , finally , when still further aggravated , comes to render the verification exercised by things in its turn imperfect and almost impossible . Everything is then blind . Thus it is that , in the sphere of science , the excessive accumulation of materials of every kind produces such chaos that the time seems to be approaching when any system will appear arbitrary . The chaos existing in economic life is still far more patent . In the actual carrying out of work , the subordination of irresponsible slaves to leaders overwhelmed by the mass of things to attend to , and , incidentally , themselves to a large extent irresponsible , is the cause of faulty workmanship and countless acts of negligence ; this evil , which was first of all restricted to the big industrial undertakings , has now spread to the countryside wherever the peasants are enslaved after the manner of the industrial workers , that is to say , in Soviet Russia . The tremendous extension of credit prevents money from playing its regulating role so far as concerns commercial exchanges and the relationships between the various branches of production ; and it would be useless to try to remedy this by doses of statistics . The parallel extension of speculation ends up by rendering the prosperity of industries independent , to a large extent , of their good functioning ; the reason being that the capital increase brought about by the actual production of each of them counts less and less as compared with the constant supply of fresh capital . In short , in all spheres , success has become something almost arbitrary ; it seems more and more to be the work of pure chance ; and as it constituted the sole rule in all branches of human activity , our civilization is invaded by an ever-increasing disorder , and ruined by a waste in proportion to that disorder . This transformation is taking place at the very moment when the sources of profit on which the capitalist economy formerly drew for its prodigious development are becoming less and less plentiful , and when the technical conditions of work are themselves imposing a rapidly decreasing tempo on the improvement of industrial equipment . So many profound changes have been taking place almost unbeknownst to us , and yet we are living in a period when the very axis of the social system is as it were in process of heeling over . Throughout the rise of the industrial system social life found itself oriented in the direction of construction . The industrial equipment of the planet was the supreme battle-ground on which the struggle for power was waged . To increase the size of an undertaking faster than its competitors , and that by means of its own resources—such was , broadly speaking , the aim and object of economic activity . Saving was the rule of economic life ; consumption was restricted as much as possible , not only that of the workers , but also that of the capitalists themselves , and , in general , all expenditure connected with other things than industrial equipment . The supreme mission of governments was to preserve peace at home and abroad . The bourgeoisie were under the impression that this state of things would go on indefinitely , for the greater happiness of humanity ; but it could not go on indefinitely in this way . Nowadays , the struggle for power , while preserving to a certain extent the same outward appearance , has entirely changed in character . The formidable increase in the part capital plant plays in undertakings , if compared with that of living labour , the rapid decrease in the rate of profit which has resulted , the ever-increasing amount of overhead expenses , waste , leakage , the lack of any regulating device for adjusting the various branches of production to one another—everything prevents social activity from still having as its pivot the development of the undertaking by turning profits into capital . It seems as though the economic struggle has ceased to be a form of competition in order to become a sort of war . It is no longer so much a question of properly organizing the work as of squeezing out the greatest possible amount of available capital scattered about in society by marketing shares , and then of squeezing out the greatest possible amount of money from everywhere by marketing products ; everything takes place in the realm of opinion , and almost of fiction , by means of speculation and publicity . Since credit is the key to all economic success , saving is replaced by the maddest forms of expenditure . The term property has almost ceased to have any meaning ; the ambitious man no longer thinks of being owner of a business and running it at a profit , but of causing the widest possible sector of economic activity to pass under his control . In a word , if we attempt to characterize , albeit in vague and summary fashion , this almost impenetrably obscure transformation , it is now a question in the struggle for economic power far less of building up than of conquering ; and since conquest is destructive , the capitalist system , though remaining outwardly pretty much the same as it was fifty years ago , is wholly turned towards destruction . The means employed in the economic struggle—publicity , lavish display of wealth , corruption , enormous capital investments based almost entirely on credit , marketing of useless products by almost violent methods , speculations with the object of ruining rival concerns—all these tend to undermine the foundations of our economic life far more than to broaden them . But all that is little enough compared with two related phenomena which are beginning to appear clearly and to cause a tragic threat to weigh upon the life of everyone ; namely , on the one hand , the fact that the State tends more and more , and with an extraordinary rapidity , to become the centre of economic and social life , and , on the other hand , the subordination of economic to military interests . If one tries to analyse these phenomena in detail , one is held up by an almost inextricable web of reciprocal causes and effects ; but the general trend is clear enough . It is quite natural that the increasingly bureaucratic nature of economic activity should favour the development of the power of the State , which is the bureaucratic organization par excellence . The profound change in the economic struggle operates in the same direction ; the State is incapable of constructing , but owing to the fact that it concentrates in its hands the most powerful means of coercion , it is brought , as it were , by its very weight gradually to become the central element when it comes to conquering and destroying . Finally , seeing that the extraordinary complication of exchange and credit operations prevents money henceforth from sufficing to co-ordinate economic life , a semblance of bureaucratic co-ordination has to make up for it ; and the central bureaucratic organization , which is the State machine , must naturally be led sooner or later to take the main hand in this co-ordination . The pivot around which revolves social life , thus transformed , is none other than preparation for war . Seeing that the struggle for power is carried out by conquest and destruction , in other words by a diffused economic war , it is not surprising that actual war should come to occupy the foreground . And since war is the recognized form of the struggle for power when the competitors are States , every increase in the State ’ s grip on economic life has the effect of orienting industrial life yet a little farther towards preparation for war ; while , conversely , the ever-increasing demands occasioned by preparation for war help day by day to bring the all-round economic and social activities of each country more and more into subjection to the authority of the central power . It seems fairly clear that contemporary humanity tends pretty well everywhere towards a totalitarian form of social organization—to use the term which the national-socialists have made fashionable—that is to say , towards a system in which the State power comes to exercise sovereign sway in all spheres , even , indeed above all , in that of thought . Russia presents us with an almost perfect example of such a system , for the greater misfortune of the Russian people ; other countries will only be able to approach it , short of upheavals similar to that of October 1917 ; but it seems inevitable that all of them will approach it more or less in the course of the coming years . This development will only give disorder a bureaucratic form , and still further increase confusion , waste and misery . Wars will bring in their train a frantic consumption of raw materials and capital equipment , a crazy destruction of wealth of all kinds that previous generations have bequeathed us . When chaos and destruction have reached the limit beyond which the very functioning of the economic and social organization becomes materially impossible , our civilization will perish ; and humanity , having gone back to a more or less primitive level of existence and to a social life dispersed into much smaller collectivities , will set out again along a new road which it is quite impossible for us to predict . To imagine that we can switch the course of history along a different track by transforming the system through reforms or revolutions , to hope to find salvation in a defensive or offensive action against tyranny and militarism—all that is just day-dreaming . There is nothing on which to base even attempts . Marx ’ s assertion that the régime would produce its own gravediggers is cruelly contradicted every day ; and one wonders , incidentally , how Marx could ever have believed that slavery could produce free men . Never yet in history has a régime of slavery fallen under the blows of the slaves . The truth is that , to quote a famous saying , slavery degrades man to the point of making him love it ; that liberty is precious only in the eyes of those who effectively possess it ; and that a completely inhuman system , as ours is , far from producing beings capable of building up a human society , models all those subjected to it—oppressed and oppressors alike—according to its own image . Everywhere , in varying degrees , the impossibility of relating what one gives to what one receives has killed the feeling for sound workmanship , the sense of responsibility , and has developed passivity , neglect , the habit of expecting everything from outside , the belief in miracles . Even in the country , the feeling of a deep-seated bond between the land which sustains the man and the man who works the land has to a large extent been obliterated since the taste for speculation , the unpredictable rises and falls in currencies and prices have got countryfolk into the habit of turning their eyes towards the towns . The worker has not the feeling of earning his living as a producer ; it is merely that the undertaking keeps him enslaved for long hours every day and allows him each week a sum of money which gives him the magic power of conjuring up at a moment ’ s notice ready-made products , exactly as the rich do . The presence of innumerable unemployed , the cruel necessity of having to beg for a job , make wages appear less as wages than as alms . As for the unemployed themselves , the fact that they are involuntary parasites , and poverty-stricken into the bargain , does not make them any the less parasites . Generally speaking , the relation between work done and money earned is so hard to grasp that it appears as almost accidental , so that labour takes on the aspect of servitude , money that of a favour . The so-called governing classes are affected by the same passivity as all the others , owing to the fact that , snowed under as they are by an avalanche of inextricable problems , they long since gave up governing . One would look in vain , from the highest down to the lowest rungs of the social ladder , for a class of men among whom the idea could one day spring up that they might , in certain circumstances , have to take in hand the destinies of society ; the harangues of the fascists could alone give the illusion of this , but they are empty . As always happens , mental confusion and passivity leave free scope to the imagination On all hands one is obsessed by a representation of social life which , while differing considerably from one class to another , is always made up of mysteries , occult qualities , myths , idols and monsters ; each one thinks that power resides mysteriously in one of the classes to which he has no access , because hardly anybody understands that it resides nowhere , so that the dominant feeling everywhere is that dizzy fear which is always brought about by loss of contact with reality . Each class appears from the outside as a nightmare object . In circles connected with the working-class movement , dreams are haunted by mythological monsters called Finance , Industry , Stock Exchange , Bank , etc . ; the bourgeois dream about other monsters which they call ringleaders , agitators , demagogues ; the politicians regard the capitalists as supernatural beings who alone possess the key to the situation , and vice versa ; each nation regards its neighbours as collective monsters inspired by a diabolical perversity . One could go on developing this theme indefinitely . In such a situation , any log whatever can be looked upon as king and take the place of one up to a certain point thanks to that belief alone ; and this is true , not merely in the case of men in general , but also in that of the governing classes . Nothing is easier , for that matter , than to spread any myth whatsoever throughout a whole population . We must not be surprised , therefore , at the appearance of “ totalitarian ” régimes unprecedented in history . It is often said that force is powerless to overcome thought ; but for this to be true , there must be thought . Where irrational opinions hold the place of ideas , force is all-powerful . It is quite unfair to say , for example , that fascism annihilates free thought ; in reality it is the lack of free thought which makes it possible to impose by force official doctrines entirely devoid of meaning . Actually , such a régime even manages considerably to increase the general stupidity , and there is little hope for the generations that will have grown up under the conditions which it creates . Nowadays , every attempt to turn men into brutes finds powerful means at its disposal . On the other hand , one thing is impossible , even were you to dispose of the best of public platforms , and that is to diffuse clear ideas , correct reasoning and sensible views on any wide scale . It is no good expecting help to come from men ; and even were it otherwise , men would none the less be vanquished in advance by the natural power of things . The present social system provides no means of action other than machines for crushing humanity ; whatever may be the intentions of those who use them , these machines crush and will continue to crush as long as they exist . With the industrial convict prisons constituted by the big factories , one can only produce slaves and not free workers , still less workers who would form a dominant class . With guns , aeroplanes , bombs , you can spread death , terror , oppression , but not life and liberty . With gas masks , air-raid shelters and air-raid warnings , you can create wretched masses of panic-stricken human beings , ready to succumb to the most senseless forms of terror and to welcome with gratitude the most humiliating forms of tyranny , but not citizens . With the popular press and the wireless , you can make a whole people swallow with their breakfast or their supper a series of ready-made and , by the same token , absurd opinions—for even sensible views become deformed and falsified in minds which accept them unthinkingly ; but you can not with the aid of these things arouse so much as a gleam of thought . And without factories , without arms , without the popular press you can do nothing against those who possess all these things . The same applies to everything . The powerful means are oppressive , the non-powerful means remain inoperative . Each time that the oppressed have tried to set up groups able to exercise a real influence , such groups , whether they went by the name of parties or unions , have reproduced in full within themselves all the vices of the system which they claimed to reform or abolish , namely , bureaucratic organization , reversal of the relationship between means and ends , contempt for the individual , separation between thought and action , the mechanization of thought itself , the exploitation of stupidity and lies as means of propaganda , and so on . The only possibility of salvation would lie in a methodical cooperation between all , strong and weak , with a view to accomplishing a progressive decentralization of social life ; but the absurdity of such an idea strikes one immediately . Such a form of co-operation is impossible to imagine , even in dreams , in a civilization that is based on competition , on struggle , on war . Apart from some such co-operation , there is no means of stopping the blind trend of the social machine towards an increasing centralization , until the machine itself suddenly jams and flies into pieces . What weight can the hopes and desires of those who are not at the control levers carry , when , reduced to the most tragic impotence , they find themselves the mere playthings of blind and brutish forces As for those who exercise economic or political authority , harried as they are incessantly by rival ambitions and hostile powers , they can not work to weaken their own authority without condemning themselves almost certainly to being deprived of it . The more they feel themselves to be animated by good intentions , the more they will be brought , even despite themselves , to endeavour to extend their authority in order to increase their ability to do good ; which amounts to oppressing people in the hope of liberating them , as Lenin did . It is quite patently impossible for decentralization to be initiated by the central authority ; to the very extent to which the central authority is exercised , it brings everything else under its subjection . Generally speaking , the idea of enlightened despotism , which has always had a utopian flavour about it , is in our day completely absurd . Faced with problems whose variety and complexity are infinitely beyond the range of great as of limited minds , no despot in the world can possibly be enlightened . Though a few men may hope , by dint of honest and methodical thinking , to perceive a few gleams in this impenetrable darkness , those whom the cares and responsibilities of authority deprive of both leisure and liberty of mind are certainly not of that number . In such a situation , what can those do who still persist , against all eventualities , in honouring human dignity both in themselves and in others ? Nothing , except endeavour to introduce a little play into the cogs of the machine that is grinding us down ; seize every opportunity of awakening a little thought wherever they are able ; encourage whatever is capable , in the sphere of politics , economics or technique , of leaving the individual here and there a certain freedom of movement amid the trammels cast around him by the social organization . That is certainly something , but it does not go very far . On the whole , our present situation more or less resembles that of a party of absolutely ignorant travellers who find themselves in a motor-car launched at full speed and driverless across broken country . When will the smash-up occur after which it will be possible to consider trying to construct something new ? Perhaps it is a matter of a few decades , perhaps of centuries . There are no data enabling one to fix a probable lapse of time . It seems , however , that the material resources of our civilization are not likely to become exhausted for some considerable time , even allowing for wars ; and , on the other hand , as centralization , by abolishing all individual initiative and all local life , destroys by its very existence everything which might serve as a basis for a different form of organization , one may suppose that the present system will go on existing up to the extreme limit of possibility . To sum up , it seems reasonable to suppose that the generations which will have to face the difficulties brought about by the collapse of the present system have yet to be born . As for the generations now living , they are perhaps , of all those that have followed each other in the course of human history , the ones which will have had to shoulder the maximum of imaginary responsibilities and the minimum of real ones . Once this situation is fully realized , it leaves a marvellous freedom of mind . CONCLUSION What exactly will perish and what subsist of our present civiization ? What are the conditions and what is the direction in which history will afterwards unfold itself ? These questions are insoluble . What we know in advance is that life will be proportionately less inhuman according as the individual ability to think and act is greater . Our present civilization , of which our descendents will no doubt inherit some fragments , at any rate contains , we feel it only too keenly , the wherewithal to crush man ; but it also contains , at least in germ , the wherewithal to liberate him . Our science includes , despite all the obscurities engendered by a sort of new scholasticism , some admirable flashes of genius , some parts that are clear and luminous , some perfectly methodical steps undertaken by the mind . In our technique also the germs of a liberation of labour can be found : probably not , as is commonly thought , in the direction of automatic machines ; these certainly appear to be suitable , from the purely technical point of view , for relieving men of the mechanical and unconscious element contained in labour , but , on the other hand , they are indissolubly bound up with an excessively centralized and consequently very oppressive economic organization . But other forms of the machine-tool have produced—above all before the war—perhaps the finest type of conscious worker history has ever seen , namely , the skilled workman . If , in the course of the last twenty years , the machine-tool has become more and more automatic in its functioning , if the work carried out , even on machines of relatively ancient design , has become more and more mechanical , the reason lies in the ever-increasing concentration of the economy . Who knows whether an industry split up into innumerable small undertakings would not bring about an inverse development of the machine-tool , and , at the same time , types of work calling for a yet greater consciousness and ingenuity than the most highly skilled work in modern factories ? We are all the more justified in entertaining such hopes in that electricity supplies the form of energy suitable for such a type of industrial organization . Given that once we have fully realized our almost complete powerlessness in regard to present-day ills we are at any rate relieved of the duty of concerning ourselves with the present state of things , apart from those moments when we feel its direct impact , what nobler task could we assume than that of preparing for such a future in a methodical way by devoting ourselves to drawing up an inventory of modern civilization ? It is certainly a task which goes far beyond the narrow possibilities of a single human life ; on the other hand , to pursue such a course is to condemn oneself of a certainty to moral loneliness , to lack of understanding , to the hostility of the enemies as well as of the servants of the existing order . As for future generations , nothing entitles us to assume that , across the upheavals which separate us from them , chance may allow the fragmentary ideas that might be elaborated by a few solitary minds in our day even to reach them . But it would be folly to complain of such a situation . No pact with Providence has ever guaranteed the effectiveness of even the most nobly-inspired efforts . And when one has resolved to place confidence , within and around oneself solely in efforts whose source and origin lie in the mind of the very person who accomplishes them , it would be foolish to wish that some magical operation should enable great results to be obtained with the insignificant forces placed at the disposal of isolated individuals . It is never by such arguments that a staunch mind can allow itself to be deflected , once it has clearly perceived that there is one thing to be done , and one only . It would thus seem to be a question of separating , in present-day civilization , what belongs of right to man , considered as an individual , and what is of a nature to place weapons in the hands of the collectivity for use against him , whilst at the same time trying to discover the means whereby the former elements may be developed at the expense of the latter . As far as science is concerned , we must no longer seek to add to the already over-great mass which it forms ; we must draw up its balance-sheet , so as to enable the mind to place in evidence there what is properly its own , what is made up of clear concepts , and to set aside what is only an automatic procedure for co-ordinating , unifying , summarizing or even discovering ; we must try to reduce these procedures themselves to conscious steps on the part of the mind ; we must , generally speaking , wherever possible , conceive of and present scientific results as merely a phase in the methodical activity of the mind . For this purpose , a serious study of the history of the sciences is probably indispensable . As for technique , it ought to be studied in a thoroughgoing manner—its history , present state , possibilities of development—and that from an entirely new point of view , which would no longer be that of output , but that of the relation between the worker and his work . Lastly , the analogy between the steps accomplished by the human mind , on the one hand in daily life and particularly in work , on the other hand in the methodical development of science , should be fully brought out . Even if a sequence of mental efforts oriented in this sense were to remain without influence on the future evolution of social organization , it would not lose its value on that account ; the future destinies of humanity are not the sole object worthy of consideration . Only fanatics are able to set no value on their own existence save to the extent that it serves a collective cause ; to react against the subordination of the individual to the collectivity implies that one begins by refusing to subordinate one ’ s own destiny to the course of history . In order to resolve upon undertaking such an effort of critical analysis , all one needs is to realize that it would enable him who did so to escape the contagion of folly and collective frenzy by reaffirming on his own account , over the head of the social idol , the original pact between the mind and the universe . ( 1934 ) FRAGMENTS , 1933–1938 The situation in which we find ourselves is of an unprecedented gravity . The most progressive and best organized proletariat in the world has not only been vanquished , but has capitulated without resistance . This is the second time in twenty years . During the war , our elders could still hope that the Russian proletariat , by its magnificent uprising , was going to rouse the European workers . In our case , nothing entitles us to entertain similar hopes ; there is no sign anywhere heralding some future victory capable of compensating for the crushing and unopposed defeat of the German workers . Never before , perhaps , since a working-class movement first started , has the relative balance of forces been so unfavourable to the proletariat as today , fifty years after the death of Marx . What remains to us of Marx , fifty years after his death ? His doctrine is indestructible ; each one can seek it out in his works and assimilate it by thinking it out anew ; and although , nowadays , a few barren formulas devoid of any real significance are hawked about under the name of Marxism , there are yet a few militants who go back to the source . But despite the fact that Marx ’ s analyses possess a value that can never perish , the object of those analyses , namely , the society contemporary with Marx , no longer exists . Marxism can only remain something living on one condition , which is that the precious tool constituted by the Marxist method should come down from generation to generation without getting rusty , each generation making use of it in order to define the world in which it lives . This is what the pre-war generation understood , as Lenin ’ s pamphlet on imperialism and a number of German publications show . All that is , unfortunately , very sketchy . But what have we , the post-war generation , done in this respect ? Judging from the literature of the working-class movement , one would say that nothing new had turned up since Marx and Lenin . And yet there is , “ over one-sixth of the globe ” , an economic régime whose like has never before been known or envisaged ; in the rest of the world , paper money , inflation , the increasing role played by the State in the economy , rationalization and a host of other changes have come to modify , and possibly transform , economic relationships ; for over four years we have been living through a crisis such as has never been known before . What do we know about all this As for myself , I can not enumerate these questions without realizing , with a bitter feeling of shame , my own ignorance ; and unfortunately there is not , as far as I know , anything in the literature of the working-class movement to entitle one to think that there are , at the present time , Marxists capable of resolving , or even of formulating clearly , the basic questions posed by the present economic set-up . That is why we must not be surprised if , fifty years after Marx ’ s death , Marxists themselves in fact treat politics as though they formed a separate field , having little connection with the field of economic facts . In the communist daily press , the division into classes which , in Marx , was meant to explain political phenomena by relationships of production , has become the source of a new mythology ; the bourgeoisie , in particular , plays in it the role of a mysterious and maleficent divinity , which brings about the phenomena that are necessary to its purposes , and whose desires and subterfuges explain almost everything that happens . More serious communist literature does not altogether escape such nonsense , and this is true even among the opposition groups , even in certain of Trotsky ’ s analyses . And , of course , since the political conceptions are not based on economics and can no more progress in a vacuum than a bird could fly without air resistance , they are those that the years before and during the war have bequeathed us . The reformist tendency remains what it has always been ; so does the anarchist ideology ; revolutionary trade unionists dream about the old C.G.T . ; orthodox and oppositional communists argue together as to which of them imitates more closely the Bolshevik party of before the war . All behave like beings deprived of consciousness as they go through this new period in which we are living , a period which can not be defined by any of the analyses previously made , and in which it seems that only men ’ s bodies are alive , while their minds are still moving in the pre-war world that has disappeared . II The question of the social structure can be reduced to that of classes . Up to now , history has only shown us societies divided up into classes , except for altogether primitive societies in which no differentiation has yet occurred . As soon as production has become a little developed , society is split into various categories which oppose each other and whose interests are at variance . The most striking opposition is that which exists between non-producers and producers , or , in other words , between exploiters and exploited ; for the non-producers necessarily consume what is produced by others , and consequently exploit them . The mechanism of exploitation defines the social structure in each period . Moreover , it is obvious that a materialistic theory can never consider the exploiters as mere parasites ; in every society divided up into classes , the exploiting of other people ’ s labour constitutes a social function , rendered possible and necessary by the productive mechanism in that society . And a classless society will only be possible if a form of production is achieved which excludes such a function . Besides , no society is ever divided merely into exploiters and exploited , but into several classes , each of which is defined by its relationship to the fundamental fact of exploitation . Three principal forms of society based on exploitation are known in history : the slave system , the feudal system and the capitalist system . We find only one form of society without exploiters , namely primitive communism , associated with a thoroughly backward technique . The vital question for us is whether , at a higher level , with a highly developed technique , production without exploitation is once again possible . In order to formulate the question correctly , one must know how to study scientifically , not only the various social structures , but above all the transformations which replace one structure by another . III What is nowadays called , by a term which seems to invite a good deal of explanation , the class struggle is , of all the conflicts that set human groups at variance , the one with the most serious objective before it . And yet here also purely imaginary entities sometimes intrude themselves which make all guided action impossible , bring nearly all efforts to nought , and almost by themselves alone create the danger of undying hatreds , useless destructions and perhaps unlimited massacres . The struggle of those who obey against those who command , when the mode of commanding entails destroying the human dignity of those underneath , is the most legitimate , most motivated , most genuine action that exists . There has always been this struggle , because those who command always tend , whether they realize it or not , to trample underfoot the human dignity of those below them ; the function of commanding , in so far as it is exercised , can not , save in exceptional circumstances , respect human qualities in the person of executive agents . If its exercise arouses no opposition , it inevitably comes to be exercised as if men were things , albeit exceptionally flexible and manageable things ; for when man is under menace of death , which is in the last resort the supreme sanction of all authority , he can become far easier to handle than inanimate matter . As long as there is a social hierarchy , be that hierarchy what it may , those below will have to struggle , and will struggle , in order not to lose all the rights of a human being . On the other hand , the resistance of those on top to the forces surging up from below , although it naturally invites less sympathy , is founded , at any rate , on concrete motives . In the first place , except in the case of a quite unusual generosity , the privileged necessarily prefer to keep their material and moral privileges intact . And , more especially , those invested with the functions of command have a mission to preserve that order which is indispensable to any social life , and the only possible order in their eyes is the established order . Up to a certain point they are right , for until a new order is in fact set up , no one can affirm that it will be possible ; that is precisely why any social progress—great or small—is only possible if the pressure from below is strong enough actually to impose new conditions on social relationships . Thus , between the pressure from below and the resistance from above an unstable balance is continually being established , and it is this which defines at each moment the structure of a given society . However , the encounter of these two opposing forces does not constitute a war , even if here and there a little bloodshed occurs . It is bound to be marked by anger , but not hatred . It may develop into a process of extermination on one side or the other , or on both sides ; but then this means that it has changed its nature , and that men ’ s minds have lost sight of the real objects of the struggle , whether because their minds are paralysed by a blind desire for vengeance , or because the intrusion of entities devoid of meaning gives the illusion—always a mistaken one—that a balance is impossible . There is then a catastrophe ; but such catastrophes are avoidable . Antiquity has not only bequeathed us the story of the interminable and pointless massacres around Troy , but also the story of the energetic and pacific action by which the Roman plebeians , without spilling a drop of blood , emerged from a condition bordering on slavery and obtained , as the guarantee of their newly-won rights , the institution of the tribunate . It was in precisely the same way that the French workers , by their pacific occupation of the factories,1 imposed paid holidays , guaranteed wages and workers ’ delegates . It is impossible to enumerate all the empty abstractions which today falsify the social struggle , certain of which are in danger of causing it to degenerate into a civil war fatal to both camps . There are too many of them . We can take only one example . Thus , what is going on in the minds of those for whom the word “ capitalism ” represents absolute evil ? We are living under a system that carries with it sometimes crushing forms of coercion and oppression ; very painful inequalities ; hosts of useless sufferings . On the other hand , this system is economically characterized by a certain relationship between the production and circulation of goods and between the circulation of goods and money . To what precise extent do these two relationships condition the sufferings in question ? To what extent are these due to other causes ? To what extent would they be alleviated or aggravated by the setting up of this or that other system ? If the problem were to be approached on this basis , we might be able perhaps to discern approximately to what extent capitalism is an evil . As we remain in ignorance on these points , we ascribe all the sufferings we have to undergo or that we observe around us to a few economic phenomena , which are , moreover , continually changing , and which we crystallize arbitrarily in an abstraction impossible to define . In the same way , a worker arbitrarily ascribes all the sufferings he undergoes in the factory to his boss , without asking himself whether under any other system of property the management would not still saddle him with a part of his sufferings or even aggravate some of them ; in his case , the struggle “ agin the boss ” gets mixed up with the irrepressible protest of the human being weighed down by too difficult living conditions . In the other camp , an identical ignorance is responsible for causing all who contemplate the ending of capitalism to be looked upon as agitators , because it is not known to what extent and on what condition the economic relationships that at present constitute capitalism can rightly be considered as necessary to order . Thus the struggle between the opponents and defenders of capitalism is one between blind men ; the efforts of the antagonists , on either side , are simply clasping empty space ; which is why this struggle is in danger of becoming merciless . The hunting down of imaginary entities in all spheres of political and social life thus appears as a task necessary in the interests of public health . The effort of clarification with the object of deflating the causes of imaginary conflicts bears no resemblance to the activities of those who use hypnotic charm in an effort to stifle genuine conflicts . It is in fact the exact opposite . The smooth talkers who , while preaching international peace , understand by that expression the indefinite maintenance of the status quo to the exclusive advantage of the French State ; those who , while recommending social peace , are determined to preserve privileges intact , or at any rate to make any modification dependent on the goodwill of those who enjoy such privileges—such people are the worst enemies of international and civil peace . To discriminate between imaginary antagonisms and genuine antagonisms , to cast discredit on empty abstractions and analyse concrete problems—that , if our contemporaries were to consent to such an intellectual effort , would be to diminish the risks of war without forgoing struggle which , according to Heraclitus , is the condition of life . IV Marxism is the highest spiritual expression of bourgeois society . Through it this society attained to a consciousness of itself , in it to a negation of itself . But this negation in its turn could only be expressed in a form determined by the existing order , in a bourgeois form of thought . So it is that each formula of Marxist doctrine lays bare the characteristics of bourgeois society , but at the same time justifies them . By dint of developing a criticism of the capitalist system of economy , Marxism ended by providing the laws of this same economic system with broad foundations ; opposition to bourgeois politics ended by claiming for itself the possibility of achieving the old ideal of the bourgeoisie—that ideal which it has realized only in an ambiguous , formal and purely legalistic manner—but of achieving it by fighting against the bourgeoisie , in a truly concrete and more consistent way than the latter ; the doctrine which in the beginning was to have served to destroy all ideologies by laying bare the interests which they concealed became itself transformed into an ideology , which was later to be misused for the purpose of deifying the interests of a certain class of bourgeois society . Thus the same phenomenon has been repeated as at the time when the youthful bourgeoisie began its struggle against feudal and ecclesiastical society . To begin with , it had to cloak its opposition in the religious accoutrements of that same society , and , in order to combat the Church , to claim kinship with primitive Christianity . In the course of its struggle against the two other orders , the bourgeoisie came to recognize the fact that it formed a distinct order , and thereby showed that , despite its opposition to the feudal system , it was conscious of forming an integral part of it ( exactly in the same way as the class-consciousness of the modern proletariat , which has arisen to compensate for an unsatisfied propensity to own property , is simply the manifestation of the bourgeois spirit animating proletarians ; for the fact of thinking in terms of classes is precisely characteristic of bourgeois society ) . The bourgeoisie was only able to free itself of this religious , ecclesiastical and feudal ideology in proportion as feudal society fell into decadence . But it only purified the representation of God of the dross that had accumulated around it since the time when there had been a natural economy ; it fashioned for itself a sublimated God who was no longer anything but a transcendent Reason , preceding all events and determining the direction they were to take . In Hegel ’ s philosophy , God still appears , under the name of “ world spirit ” , as mover of history and lawgiver of nature . It was not until after accomplishing its revolution that the bourgeoisie recognized in this God a creation of man himself , and that history is man ’ s own work . It was Ludwig Feuerbach who clearly formulated this idea ; but he was incapable of explaining how it is that “ man ” comes to make history . For only a mixture of actions can proceed from a juxtaposing of men considered simply as natural beings , but not a regular and ascending development of humanity . Marx ’ s primary and decisive discovery consisted simply in that he went beyond Feuerbach ’ s abstract man and began seeking for the explanation of the historical process in cooperation between individuals , in union and struggle , in the manifold “ relationships ” that exist between them . However , this progress in thought is still being paid for now , from another point of view , by an unconscious regression . Karl Marx only managed to rise above Feuerbach ’ s isolated “ human being ” by re-introducing into history , under the name of “ society ” , the God whom Feuerbach had eliminated from it . Indeed , Marx begins by presenting the new divinity to us in harmless form , as the “ totality of social relationships ” , that is to say as the union of all individual relationships between concrete and active men . He emphasizes on more than one occasion that these “ relationships ” are , of course , empirical products of human activity , that their “ totality ” , if one absolutely insists on giving a special name to the changing relations which act as a bond of union between active men , must be regarded simply as an abbreviated term designating the result of the historical process . But the deeper Marx ’ s analysis penetrates into the course of history and economic laws , the more his point of view is modified , until , surprisingly , the “ collectivity ” becomes an hypostasis , the condition of individual actions , an “ essence ” which “ appears ” in men ’ s action and thought and is “ realized ” in their activity . It constitutes , by the side of the “ private ” sphere of bourgeois individualism , a separate sphere , that of the “ general ” , and , in its capacity as an independent substance , forms the basis of the first ; for example , the value of a product is already determined by it , before becoming “ realized ” in the actual , empirical market price . And under a socialist system , too , there will still be a certain separation between the two spheres . One has only to consider the formula : “ individual property on the basis of a collective possession of the land and of the means of production ” , the formula which defines the future economic order in a well-known passage of Capital . The distinction between a general and an individual sphere is here expressly formulated ; but it is only possible to visualize a “ collective possession ” if one regards the collectivity as a particular substance , soaring above individuals and acting through them . If all this is disputed , one has but to examine closely the Marxist formula : social existence determines consciousness . There are more contradictions in it than words . Seeing that what is “ social ” can have an existence only in human minds , “ social existence ” is itself already consciousness ; it can not in addition determine a consciousness which would in any case remain to be defined . To posit in this way a “ social existence ” as a special determining factor , divorced from our consciousness , hidden no-one knows where , is to make a hypostasis of it ; and it constitutes , furthermore , a beautiful example of Marx ’ s tendency towards dualism . But if one wants to consider this enigmatic “ existence ” as an element of the relationships between men , which depends on certain institutions , such as money , one will clearly perceive at once that this element operates only as a result of conscious acts performed by individuals , and consequently , far from determining consciousness , is dependent on it . Moreover , if Marx , as opposed to all the thinkers who preceded him , considers it necessary to set on one side a particular form of existence , which he calls “ social ” , it means that he tacitly places it in opposition to the rest of existence , that is to say nature . CRITICAL EXAMINATION OF THE IDEAS OF REVOLUTION AND PROGRESS2 One magic word today seems capable of compensating for all sufferings , resolving all anxieties , avenging the past , curing present ills , summing up all future possibilities : that word is “ revolution ” . It was not coined yesterday . It goes back more than a century and a half . A first attempt to apply it , from 1789 to 1793 , produced something , but not what was expected of it . Since then , each generation of revolutionaries has , in its youth , believed itself to be destined to bring about the real revolution , has then gradually grown old and finally died transferring its hopes to succeeding generations ; it runs no risk of being proved wrong , since it is dead . This word has aroused such pure acts of devotion , has repeatedly caused such generous blood to be shed , has constituted for so many unfortunates the only source of courage for living , that it is almost a sacrilege to investigate it ; all this , however , does not prevent it from possibly being meaningless . It is only for priests that martyrs can be a substitute for proofs . If one considers the system whose abolition is being called for , it seems that the word “ revolution ” has never had such an up-to-date significance , for it is obvious that this system is very sick indeed . If one turns towards its possible successors , one finds a paradoxical situation . At the present time there is no organized movement which actually takes the word “ revolution ” for a watchword determining the direction to be followed by action and propaganda . Yet never before has this watchword been adopted by so many people ; and it has a special individual appeal for all who suffer in body or soul from the present conditions of existence , for all who are victims or who simply regard themselves as such , for all , too , who generously take to heart the fate of the victims surrounding them , and for many others besides . This word contains the solution of all the insoluble problems . The havoc caused by the last war , the preparations for a possible future war , weigh with ever greater force upon the peoples of the world ; every disturbance in the circulation of money and goods , in credit , in capital investments , results in appalling misery ; technical progress seems to bring the mass of people more overwork and insecurity than welfare ; all this will vanish the moment the hour strikes for the revolution . The worker who , when in the factory , “ finds the hours drag ” , bound as he is to passive obedience and a dreary and monotonous task , or thinks himself not intended for manual work , or is harried by a superior ; or who , outside the factory gates , resents his inability to stand himself such and such a treat available to customers well supplied with money—his thoughts run on the revolution . The unfortunate small shopkeeper , the ruined rentier , turn their eyes towards the revolution . The bourgeois adolescent in rebellion against home surroundings and school routine , the intellectual yearning for adventure and suffering from boredom , dream of the revolution . The engineer , whose reason and amour propre are alike offended by the priority given to financial over technological considerations , and who wants to see technology ruling the world , longs for the revolution . The majority of those who seriously take to heart liberty , equality and the general welfare , who suffer at the sight of miseries and injustices , await the arrival of a revolution . If one were to take one by one all those who have ever uttered hopefully the word “ revolution ” , to seek out the true motives that have turned each of them in this direction , the precise changes , of a general or personal kind , which they genuinely look forward to , one would discover what an extraordinary variety of ideas and feelings can be covered by the same word . One would see how one man ’ s revolution is not always that of his neighbour—far from it ; how the two sorts of revolution are even very often incompatible . One would also find that there is often no connection between the aspirations of all kinds that this word represents in the minds of the men who utter it and the realities to which it is likely to correspond if the future should actually have a social upheaval in store . At bottom , one thinks nowadays of the revolution , not as a solution to the problems raised at the present time , but as a miracle dispensing one from solving problems . The proof that it is so regarded is that it is expected to drop from the skies ; one waits for it to happen , one does not ask oneself who is to bring it about . Few people are simple-minded enough to count in this respect on the big organizations , whether trade union or political , which with more or less conviction continue to claim to represent it . Although their headquarters are not absolutely devoid of capable men , the most optimistic glance cast around them would fail to detect the embryo of a team capable of carrying through a task of these dimensions . Those who form the second rank—the young—show no sign of containing the members of such a team . Anyway , these organizations reflect to a large extent the faults that they denounce in the society in which they are evolving ; they even contain other more serious faults , as a result of the influence exerted on them from a distance by a certain totalitarian system worse than the capitalist system . As for the small groups , of extremist or moderate tendency , who accuse the big organizations of doing nothing and display such a touching perseverance in announcing the glad tidings , they would be harder put to it still to designate men capable of presiding at the birth of a new order . One places one ’ s trust , it is true—or at least one pretends to do so—in the spontaneity of the masses . June 1936 provided a moving example of this spontaneity which one imagined had been wiped out , in France , in the blood of the Commune . A tremendous , ungovernable outburst , springing from the very bowels of the masses , suddenly loosened the vice of social constraint , made the atmosphere at last breathable , changed opinions in all minds , and caused things that six months earlier had been looked upon as scandalous to be accepted as self-evident . Thanks to the incomparable power of persuasion possessed by force , millions of men made it clear—and in the first place to themselves—that they had a share in the sacred rights of humanity , something that even discerning minds had not been able to perceive at the time when they were weak . But that is all . Indeed unless it were to lead towards a more profound upheaval , that is all there could be . The masses do not pose problems , do not solve any ; thus they neither organize nor construct . In any case they , too , are profoundly impregnated with the faults of the system under which they live , labour and suffer . Their aspirations bear the imprint of that system . Capitalist society reduces everything to pounds , shillings and pence ; the aspirations of the masses are also expressed chiefly in pounds , shillings and pence . The system is based on inequality ; the masses give expression to unequal demands . The system is based on coercion ; the masses , as soon as they have the right to speak , exercise in their own ranks a similar sort of coercion . It is difficult to see how there could spring up from the masses , spontaneously , the opposite of the system which has formed , or rather deformed , them . One forms a strange idea in one ’ s mind of the revolution , when one comes to look closely at the matter . Indeed , to say that one forms an idea of it is to say too much . What are the signs by which the revolutionaries think they will be able to recognize the moment when the revolution is actually there ? By the barricades and the firing in the streets ? By a certain team of men being installed in the government ? By the breach of legal forms ? By specific acts of nationalization ? By the massive exodus of the bourgeoisie ? By the issuing of a decree abolishing private property ? All that is not clear . However , the fact remains that one awaits , under the name of “ revolution ” , a time when the last shall be first , when the values negated or suppressed by the present system will occupy the forefront , when the slaves , albeit without abandoning their tasks , will be the only citizens , when the social callings at present doomed to submission , obedience and silence will be the first to have the right to say their say and take their part in all matters of public interest . This has nothing to do with religious prophecies . Such a future is represented as corresponding to the normal development of history . This shows that one does not form any correct idea of the normal development of history . Even when one has studied it , one remains filled with vague memories of primary school textbooks and chronological tables . People cite the example of 1789 . We are told that what the bourgeoisie did with regard to the nobility in 1789 , the proletariat will do with regard to the bourgeoisie in a year unspecified . People think that in that year 1789 , or at any rate between 1789 and 1793 , a hitherto subordinate social stratum , the bourgeoisie , drove out and replaced those who ruled society , the kings and nobles . In the same way they think that at a certain moment , designated by the term great invasions , the barbarians invaded the Roman Empire , broke up the Empire ’ s administrative cadres , reduced the Romans to a very inferior status , and took over command everywhere . Why should the proletarians not do the same thing , in their own way ? In effect , that is the way things happen in the textbooks . In the textbooks , the Roman Empire lasts up to the beginning of the great invasions ; after that , a new chapter opens . In the textbooks , the king , the nobility and the clergy own France until the day when the Bastille falls ; after that , it is the Third Estate . For years we have all absorbed this catastrophic notion of history , where the catastrophes are marked by the ends or the beginnings of chapters ; we do not get rid of it , and we regulate our action upon it . The division of history textbooks into chapters will cost us many disastrous mistakes . This division does not correspond to anything of what is known concerning the past . There was no violent substitution of the initial patterns of feudalism for the Roman Empire . In the Empire itself , the barbarians had begun to fill the most important posts , the Romans being gradually reduced to honorary or subordinate positions , the army was disintegrating into armed bands led by adventurers , the system of military colonies was gradually replacing slavery—all this long before the great invasions . Similarly , in 1789 , the nobility had already long been reduced to the position of near-parasites . A century earlier , Louis XIV , so haughty in his demeanour towards the highest in the land , would assume a deferential attitude in the presence of a banker . The bourgeoisie occupied the highest positions in the State , reigned in the king ’ s name , filled the magistracy , managed the industrial and commercial undertakings , won renown in the sciences and in literature , and left the nobles with little more than one monopoly , that of the higher appointments in the army . Other examples could be cited . When it seems that a sanguinary struggle replaces one system by another , this struggle is in reality the crowning point of a transformation that is already more than half accomplished , and brings to power a category of men who already more than half possessed that power . This is a necessity . How could there be a break in the continuity of social life , seeing that we have to eat , clothe ourselves , produce and exchange , command and obey every day , and that all this can only be done today in ways closely similar to those of yesterday ? It is under an apparently stable system that changes slowly take place in the structure of social relationships and in the functions allotted to the various social categories . When violent conflicts break out—and they do not always do so—they only play the role of a pair of scales ; they hand over power to those who possess it already . Thus it was , to confine ourselves to these two examples , that the great invasions delivered the Roman Empire into the hands of the barbarians , who had already taken possession of it from within , and that the fall of the Bastille , with what followed in its wake , consolidated the modern State—which the kings had set up—by handing the country over to the bourgeoisie , who already did practically everything in it . If the October Revolution , in Russia , seems to have created something altogether new , this is only so in appearance ; all it did was to reinforce those powers which were already the only real ones under the Tsars—the bureaucracy , the police , the army . This type of event abolishes those privileges that do not correspond to any effective function , but does not upset the distribution of the functions themselves and of the powers attaching to them . In these days , it might well happen that the financiers , speculators , shareholders , collectors of directorships , small tradesmen , rentiers—all these parasites large and small—were one fine day swept away . This might also be accompanied by acts of violence . But how can one believe that those who labour as serfs in the factories and in the mines will promptly change into citizens under a new economic system ? It is others , not they , who will reap the benefit of the operation . Those who claim to base their belief in a revolution on arguments—and even scientific ones—all quote Marx as an authority . The so-called scientific socialism created by Marx has reached the position of a dogma , as indeed have all the results established by modern science , and the conclusions are accepted once and for all , without ever any enquiry into the methods and demonstrations involved . People would rather believe that Marx has demonstrated the future , and imminent , constitution of a socialist society than study his works to see if they can discover there even the remotest attempt at demonstration . True , Marx analyses and takes to pieces with admirable clarity the mechanism of capitalist oppression ; but he accounts for it so thoroughly that one can scarcely visualize how , with the selfsame cogs , the mechanism could one fine day transform itself to the point where oppression should progressively begin to disappear . MEDITATION ON OBEDIENCE AND LIBERTY The submission of the greater number to the smaller—that fundamental characteristic of nearly every form of social organization—still continues to astonish all who reflect a little . In nature , we see how what is heavier triumphs over what is lighter , how the more prolific species overwhelm the rest . In the case of men , these so clearly marked relations seem to be reversed . Certainly , we know from daily experience that man is not just a fragment of nature , that every day there are kinds of miracles being produced by what is highest in man—will , intelligence and faith . But that is not what we are dealing with here . There is nothing spiritual about that pitiless necessity which has kept , and goes on keeping , the masses of slaves , the masses of poverty-stricken creatures , the masses of underlings on their knees ; it corresponds to everything that is brutal in nature . And yet it is apparently exercised in virtue of laws which are contrary to those of nature ; as if , in the social balance , the gramme were heavier than the kilogramme . Nearly four centuries ago , the question was posed by the youthful La Boétie , in his Contra-un . He did not answer it . With what moving illustrations could we not support his little book , we who see at the present time , in a country covering a sixth of the globe , a single man bleeding an entire generation ! It is when death stalks abroad that the miracle of obedience strikes one so forcibly . That a number of men should submit themselves to a single man through fear of being killed by him is astonishing enough ; but what are we to make of it when they remain submissive to him to the point of dying at his orders ? When there are at least as many risks attached to obedience as there are to rebellion , how is obedience maintained ? Knowledge of the material world in which we live was able to develop from the moment when Florence , after producing so many other marvels , brought mankind , through Galileo , the notion of force . It was then also only that the equipping of the material side of life by industry could be undertaken . And we , who claim to set about equipping the social side of life , will not have even the crudest knowledge of it as long as we have not formed a clear notion of social force . Society can not have its engineers as long as it has not first had its Galileo . Is there at the present time , over the whole of the earth ’ s surface , a single mind which can conceive even vaguely how it is that one man in the Kremlin has the power to cause any head whatever to fall within the confines of the Russian frontiers ? Marxists have not helped towards forming a clear view of the problem by picking out economics as the key to the social riddle . If one considers a society as a collective being , then this great beast , like all other beasts , can principally be defined by the way in which it makes sure of its food , sleep , shelter from the elements—in short , its life . But society considered in its relation to the individual can not be defined simply by the methods of production . However much you may resort to all kinds of subtleties to show that war is an essentially economic phenomenon , it is palpably obvious that war is destruction and not production . Obedience and command are also phenomena for which the conditions of production do not provide a sufficient explanation . When an old working man , unemployed and left to starve , dies quietly in the street or some slum , this submission which extends to the very point of death can not be explained by the play of vital necessities . The massive destruction of wheat and of coffee during the crisis furnishes a no less clear example . The notion of force and not that of need is the key to an understanding of social phenomena . Galileo had no cause to congratulate himself , as far as he personally was concerned , for having put so much genius and so much integrity into deciphering nature ; but at any rate he only found himself up against a handful of powerful men specialized in the interpretation of the Scriptures . The study of the social mechanism , on the other hand , is hampered by passions that are found in all and each of us . There is hardly anyone who does not desire either to overthrow or to preserve the present relations between the functions of command and submission . Both of these desires befog the mind ’ s scrutiny and prevent one from perceiving the lessons of history , which everywhere shows us the masses under the yoke and a few raising the lash . Some—those on the side which addresses its appeal to the masses—wish to show that such a situation is not only iniquitous , but also impossible , at any rate in the near or distant future . Others—on the side which wants to preserve order and established privileges—wish to show that the yoke is light , or even that it is consented to . On both sides , a veil is thrown over the fundamental absurdity of the social mechanism , instead of looking this apparent absurdity fairly in the face and analysing it so as to discover in it the secret of the machine . Whatever may be the subject under investigation , there is no other method for thinking about it . Wonder is the father of wisdom , Plato said . Since the many obey , and obey to the point of allowing suffering and death to be inflicted on them , while the few command , this means that it is not true that number constitutes a force . Number , whatever our imagination may lead us to believe , is a weakness . Weakness is on the side where people are hungry , exhausted , where they implore and tremble , not on the side where they live comfortably , bestow favours , and issue threats . The masses are not in subjection despite the fact of their being number , but because they are number . If there is a street fight between one man against twenty , the man will probably be left on the ground for dead . But at a sign from a white man , twenty Annamite coolies can be flogged , one after the other , by one or two foremen , The contradiction is perhaps only apparent . No doubt on all occasions those who command are fewer than those who obey . But precisely because they are few they form a whole . The others , precisely because they are too many , are one plus one plus one , and so on . Thus the power of an infinitesimal minority is based , in spite of everything , on the force of number . This minority is far stronger in number than each one of those who go to form the herd of the majority . It must not be concluded from this that organization of the masses would reverse the relation ; for such is impossible . It is only possible to establish cohesion between a limited number of men . Beyond that , there is no longer anything but a juxtaposing of individuals—that is to say weakness . There are , however , certain moments when it is not so . At certain moments in history , a great rush of wind sweeps over the masses ; their breath , their words , their movements are merged together . Then nothing is able to resist them . The mighty know in their turn , at last , what it is to feel alone and defenceless ; and they tremble . Tacitus , in a few immortal pages describing a military mutiny , analysed the matter perfectly . “ The principal sign that it was a deep-seated movement , impossible to quell , was that they were not scattered about or controlled by a few individuals , but flared up as one man , fell silent as one man , with such unanimity and constancy that one would have thought they were acting upon a word of command. ” We all witnessed a miracle of this kind in June 1936 , and the impression it made has not yet been effaced . Such moments do not last , although the downtrodden ardently hope to see them last for ever . They can not last , because that unanimity which is produced in the heat of a quickening and general emotion is incompatible with any form of methodical action . Its effect is always to suspend all action and arrest the daily course of life . This temporary stoppage can not be prolonged ; the course of daily life has to be taken up again , the daily tasks have to be performed . The mass dissolves once more into individuals , the memory of its victory fades , the erstwhile situation , or its equivalent , is gradually re-established ; and although it may be that in the interval there has been a change of masters , it is always the same ones who have to obey . The powerful have no interest more vital than to prevent this crystallization of the subject masses , or at any rate , for they can not always prevent it , to make it as rare as possible . It often happens in the natural course of things that a great many of the downtrodden are swept by the same emotion at the same time ; but as a rule this emotion has barely had the time to awaken when it is repressed by the feeling of an irremediable impotence . The first article of skilful policy on the part of the masters is to foster this feeling of impotence . The human mind is incredibly flexible , prompt to imitate , to bow to outside circumstances . The man who obeys , whose movements , pains , pleasures are determined by the word of another , feels himself to be inferior , not by accident , but by nature . At the other end of the scale there is a like feeling of superiority , and these twin illusions reinforce each other . It is impossible for the most heroically staunch mind to preserve the consciousness of an inward value when there is no external fact on which this consciousness can be based . Christ himself , when he found himself abandoned by everybody , mocked , despised , his life counted for naught , lost for a moment the feeling of his mission . What other meaning can be attached to the cry : “ My God , my God , why hast thou forsaken me ? ” It seems to those who obey that some mysterious inferiority has predestined them to obey from all eternity , and every mark of scorn—even the tiniest—which they suffer at the hands of their superiors or their equals , every order they receive , and especially every act of submission they themselves perform confirms them in this feeling . Everything that contributes towards giving those who are at the bottom of the social scale the feeling that they possess a value is to a certain extent subversive . The myth of Soviet Russia is subversive in so far as it can give the communist factory worker who is sacked by his foreman the feeling that , in spite of all , he has behind him the Red Army and Magnitogorsk , and thus enable him to preserve his pride . The myth of the historically inevitable revolution plays the same , though a more abstract , role ; it is something , when one is lonely and miserable , to have history on one ’ s side . Christianity , too , when it first began , was dangerous to the established order . It did not inspire the poor , the slaves , with the desire for power and the goods of this world—quite the opposite ; but it gave them the feeling of an inner value which put them on the same level as or higher than the rich , and that was enough to place the social hierarchy in danger . It very quickly mended its ways , learnt how to make the proper distinction between the marriage and burial ceremonies for the rich and those for the poor , and to relegate the unfortunate to the back seats . Social force is bound to be accompanied by lies . That is why all that is highest in human life , every effort of thought , every effort of love , has a corrosive action on the established order . Thought can just as readily , and on as good grounds , be stigmatized as revolutionary on the one side , as counter-revolutionary on the other . In so far as it is ceaselessly creating a scale of values “ that is not of this world ” , it is the enemy of the forces which control society . But it is no more favourably disposed towards undertakings which tend to disrupt or transform society , and which , before ever they have succeeded , must necessarily imply for those who pursue them the subjection of the many to the few , the disdain of the privileged for the anonymous masses , and the handling of lies . Genius , love , holiness , fully deserve the reproach that is often levelled at them of tending to destroy what is without building up anything in its place . As for those who want to think , love , and transpose in all purity into political action what their mind and heart inspire them with , they can only perish murdered , forsaken even by their own people , vilified after their death by history , as happened to the Gracchi . Such a state of things results in profound and irremediable spiritual torture for every man with the public welfare at heart . Participation , even from a distance , in the play of forces which control the movement of history is not possible without contaminating oneself or incurring certain defeat . Nor is it possible , without great lack of conscientiousness , to take refuge in indifference or in an ivory tower . Thus there remains the formula of the “ lesser evil ” , so discredited by the use which the social-democrats have made of it , as the only one applicable , provided it be applied with the coldest lucidity . The social order , though necessary , is essentially evil , whatever it may be . You can not reproach those whom it crushes for undermining it as much as they can ; when they resign themselves to it , it is not through strength of character but , on the contrary , as the result of a humiliation which extinguishes the virile qualities in them . Neither can you reproach those who organize it for defending it , or make them out to be forming a conspiracy against the general welfare . The struggles between fellow citizens do not spring from a lack of understanding or goodwill ; they belong to the nature of things , and can not be appeased , but can only be smothered by coercion . For anyone who loves liberty , it is not desirable that they should disappear , but only that they should remain short of a certain limit of violence . ON THE CONTRADICTIONS OF MARXISM To my mind , it is not events which make a revision of Marxism a necessity , it is Marx ’ s doctrine , which , because of the gaps and inconsistencies it contains , is and has always been far inferior to the role people have wanted to make it play ; which does not mean to say that either then or since anything better has been worked out . It is the recollection of my own personal experience that leads me to express so categorical a judgment , and one so calculated to cause offence . When , in my youth , I read Capital for the first time , I was immediately struck by certain gaps , certain contradictions of the first importance . Their very obviousness , at that time , prevented me from placing confidence in my own judgment ; I said to myself that so many great minds that have embraced Marxism must also have perceived these patently clear gaps and inconsistencies ; that therefore the former must certainly have been filled in , the latter resolved , in other works on Marxist doctrine . How many young minds are not thus led , through lack of self-confidence , to stifle their most justified doubts ? As for me , in the years that followed , the study of Marxist literature , of Marxist parties or those which go by that name , and of events themselves , was only able to confirm me in the judgment formed in my youth . So it is not by comparison with the facts , but in itself , that I consider Marxist doctrine to be defective ; or rather , I think that the body of writings by Marx , Engels and those who have taken them as guides does not constitute a doctrine . There is a contradiction , an obvious , glaring contradiction , between Marx ’ s analytic method and his conclusions . This is not surprising ; he worked out the conclusions before the method . Hence Marxism ’ s claim to be a science is rather amusing . Marx became a revolutionary in his youth , under the influence of noble sentiments ; his ideal at this period was , indeed , humane , clear , conscious , reasoned , quite as much as—and even considerably more than—during the subsequent years of his life . Later , he tried to work out a method for studying human societies . His vigorous mind did not allow him to manufacture a mere caricature of a method ; he saw , or at any rate glimpsed , an authentic method . Such are the two contributions he made to the history of thought : in his youth , he perceived a new formula for the social ideal , and in his maturity , the new or partly new formula of a method for interpreting history . He thus gave double proof of genius . Unfortunately , loth , as all strong characters are , to allow two separate men to go on living in him—the revolutionary and the scientist ; averse also to that sort of hypocrisy which adherence to an ideal unaccompanied by action implies ; insufficiently scrupulous , moreover , in regard to his own thought , he insisted on making his method into an instrument for predicting a future in conformity with his desires . To achieve this , he was obliged to give a twist both to the method and to the ideal , to deform the one and the other . In the slackening of his thought which permitted such deformations , he allowed himself—he , the nonconformist—to be carried away into an unconscious conformity with the most ill-founded superstitions of his day , the cult of production , the cult of big industry , the blind belief in progress . He thus dealt a serious and lasting , maybe irreparable blow—at any rate one difficult to repair—both to the scientific and to the revolutionary spirit . I do not think that the workers ’ movement in this country will become something living again until it seeks , I will not say doctrines , but a source of inspiration , in what Marx and Marxists have fought against and very foolishly despised : in Proudhon , in the workers ’ groups of 1848 , in the trade-union tradition , in the anarchist spirit . As for a doctrine , the future alone , at best , will perhaps be able to provide one ; not the past . Marx ’ s ideas about revolutions can be expressed thus : a revolution takes place at the moment when it is already nearly accomplished ; it is when the structure of a society has ceased to correspond to its institutions that these change and are replaced by others which reflect the new structure . In particular , the section of society which the revolution places in power is the same as that which already , before the revolution , although victimized by the prevailing institutions , in fact played the most active role . Broadly speaking , “ historical materialism ” , so often misunderstood , means that institutions are determined by the actual mechanism of the relations between men , which in turn depends on the form taken at each moment by the relations between man and nature , that is to say on the way in which production is carried out ; production of consumer goods , production of the means of production , and also—an important point , although Marx leaves it undeveloped—production of the means of making war . Men are not the impotent playthings of fate ; they are eminently active beings ; but their activity is at each moment limited by the structure of the society which they form among themselves , and only modifies that structure in its turn by a ricochet , once it has modified the relations between them and nature . The social structure can never be modified except indirectly . On the other hand , the analysis of the present system—an analysis that is found scattered through several of Marx ’ s works—fixes the source of the cruel oppression suffered by the workers not in men , nor in institutions , but in the very mechanism of social relations . If the workers are exhausted by fatigue and want , this is because they do not count for anything and the growth of the factories counts for everything . They do not count for anything because the role that the majority of them play in production is that of mere cogs , and they are degraded to this role of cogs because intellectual labour has become separated from manual labour , and because the development of machinery has taken away the privilege of skill from man so as to transfer it to inert matter . The growth of the factory counts for everything , because the spur of competition is continually forcing factories to expand in order to subsist ; consequently “ the relationship between consumption and production is reversed ” , “ consumption is only a necessary evil ” ; and if the workers are not paid according to the value of their labour , this is simply the result of the “ reversal of the relationship between subject and object ” which sacrifices man to lifeless machinery and makes production of the means of production the supreme aim . The role of the State leads to a similar analysis . If the State is oppressive , if democracy is a delusion , it is because the State is composed of three permanent bodies , recruited by co-option and distinct from the people , namely , the army , the police and the bureaucracy . The interests of these three bodies are different from those of the population and consequently opposed to them . It follows that the “ State machine ” is oppressive by its very nature , its mechanism can not function without crushing the citizens ; the best will in the world can not turn it into an instrument for the public good ; the only way to stop it from being oppressive is to smash it . Moreover—and in this matter Marx ’ s analysis is less rigorous—the oppression exercised by the State machine is identical with that exercised by big industry ; this machine is automatically at the service of the principal social force , namely , capital , or in other words the equipment of industrial undertakings . Those who are sacrificed to the development of industrial equipment , that is to say the proletariat , are also those who are exposed to the full brutality of the State , and the State keeps them by force in the position of slaves of the undertakings . What are we to conclude ? The conclusion forces itself on the mind : nothing of all this can be abolished by means of a revolution ; on the contrary , all this must have disappeared before a revolution can take place ; or if it does take place beforehand , it will only be an apparent revolution which will leave oppression intact or even increase it . Yet Marx reached precisely the opposite conclusion ; he concluded that society was ripe for a revolution of liberation . Do not let us forget that nearly a hundred years ago he already thought such a revolution to be imminent . On this point at any rate he has been strikingly refuted by events , strikingly so in Europe and in America , still more strikingly so in Russia . But the refutation provided by events was scarcely necessary ; in Marx ’ s doctrine itself the contradiction was so striking that it is surprising neither he , nor his friends , nor his followers became aware of it . How were the factors of oppression , so closely bound up with the actual mechanism of social life , suddenly to disappear ? How , given big industry , machinery and the degradation of manual labour , could the workers be anything but mere cogs in the factories ? How , if they continued to be mere cogs , could they at the same time become the “ ruling class ” ? How , given the techniques of war , policing and administration , could the military , police and administrative functions cease to be specialized callings , professions , and consequently the prerogative of “ permanent bodies , distinct from the population ” ? Or else must we assume a transformation of industry , of machinery , of the technique of manual labour , that of administration , that of war ? But such transformations are slow , gradual ; they are not the result of a revolution . One can say that to such questions which immediately follow from Marx ’ s analyses , neither Marx , nor Engels , nor their disciples provided the least answer . They passed them over in silence . In regard to one point only did Marx and Engels draw attention to a possible transition from the capitalist system towards a better form of society ; they thought they saw that the very development of competition must bring about automatically , and in a brief space , the disappearance of competition and at the same time that of capitalistic property . In effect , the concentration of undertakings was taking place under their eyes , just as it still is under ours . Seeing that it is competition which , under the capitalist system , turns the expansion of undertakings into an end , and men , whether considered as producers or consumers , into a mere means , they could indeed regard the disappearance of competition as equivalent to that of the system itself . But they reasoned wrongly in one respect ; just because competition , which causes the small to be devoured by the big , gradually reduces the number of competitors , you can not therefore conclude that this number must one day necessarily be reduced to one . Moreover , Marx and Engels , in their analysis , omitted one factor : war . Marxists have never analysed the phenomenon of war , nor its relation to the economic system ; for I do not call the simple assertion that capitalist greed is the cause of wars an analysis . What a gap ! And what credence can be given to a theory which claims to be scientific and is capable of such an omission ? For since industrial production is nowadays not only the chief source of wealth but also the chief means of carrying on war , the result is that it is subjected not only to competition between undertakings but to a still more urgent and imperative competition—that between nations . How is that competition to be abolished ? Must it , like the other , abolish itself by the progressive elimination of competitors ? Must we wait , in order to be able to look forward to socialism , for the day when the world will find itself under the pax Germanica or the pax Japonica ? That day is not near at hand , if it is indeed ever to come , and the parties which claim to represent socialism do everything possible to postpone it . The problems which Marxism has failed to solve have not been solved by events , either ; they have , in fact , become more and more acute . Although the workers live better than they did in Marx ’ s day—at any rate in countries peopled by the white race , for it is a different story , alas , in the colonies ; and even Russia must perhaps be excepted—the obstacles in the way of their liberation are more difficult to overcome now than then . The Taylor system and those that have followed it have reduced the workers to a far greater extent than before to the position of mere cogs in the factories , except for a few highly-skilled jobs . Manual labour , in the majority of cases , is still farther removed from the work of a craftsman , still more divested of intelligence and skill ; machines are still more oppressive . The arms race calls still more imperiously for the sacrifice of the people as a whole to industrial production . The State machine develops day by day in a more monstrous fashion , becomes day by day farther and farther removed from the mass of the population , blinder , more inhuman . Any country that attempted a socialist revolution would be very quickly compelled , in order to defend itself against the rest , to reproduce in magnified form all the cruelties of the system it had set out to abolish , unless the revolution were to spread . Doubtless such a contagion may be expected , but it would have to occur immediately or not at all ; for a revolution that has degenerated into a tyranny ceases to be contagious ; and , among other obstacles in the way , the exacerbation of nationalist feeling prevents one from being able reasonably to believe in the immediate extension of a revolution in several big countries . Thus the contradiction between the method of analysis elaborated by Marx and the revolutionary hopes that he announced seems still sharper today than in his time . What are we to conclude from this ? Must there be a revision of Marxism ? One can not revise something which does not exist , and there has never been such a thing as Marxism , but only a series of incompatible assertions , some of them well founded , others not ; unfortunately , the best founded are the least palatable . We are still asked if such a revision should bear a revolutionary stamp . But what do we understand by the word “ revolutionary ” ? It is capable of a good many interpretations . Does being a revolutionary mean expecting in the near future some blessed catastrophe , some upheaval which realizes on this earth a part of the promises contained in the Gospels , and gives us finally a society wherein the last shall be first ? If that is what it means , then I am not a revolutionary , for such a future—which incidentally would overwhelm me with joy—is to my mind , if not impossible , at any rate altogether improbable ; and I do not think that anyone can nowadays have solid , serious reasons for being a revolutionary in this sense . Or else does being a revolutionary mean calling forth by one ’ s wishes and helping by one ’ s acts everything which can , directly or indirectly , alleviate or lift the weight that presses upon the mass of men , break the chains that degrade labour , reject the lies by means of which it is sought to disguise or excuse the systematic humiliation of the majority ? In that event it is a case of an ideal , a judgment of value , something willed , and not of an interpretation of human history and of the social mechanism . Taken in this sense , the revolutionary spirit is as old as oppression itself and will go on for as long , even longer ; for if oppression should disappear , it will have to continue in order to prevent its reappearance ; it is eternal ; it has no need to undergo a revision , but it can become enriched , sharpened , and it must be purified of all the extraneous accretions that can come to disguise and corrupt it . This eternal spirit of revolt which quickened the Roman plebeians , which fired almost simultaneously , towards the end of the fourteenth century , the wool workers of Florence , the English peasantry , the artisans of Ghent , what can it take and assimilate from the works of Marx ? It has to take from thence precisely that which has been almost forgotten by what is called Marxism : the glorification of productive labour , considered as man ’ s highest activity ; the assertion that only a society wherein the act of work brought all man ’ s faculties into play , wherein the man who works occupied the front rank , would realize human greatness to the full . We find , in Marx ’ s early writings , lines concerning labour that have a lyrical accent ; we also find some in Proudhon and in certain poets , in Goethe , in Verhaeren . This new poetry , appropriate to our time , which forms perhaps its chief claim to greatness , must not be lost . Therein the oppressed must find evoked their own mother-country , which is hope . But in other respects Marxism has seriously debased that spirit of revolt which , in the last century , shone with so pure a light in our country . It has mingled with it at the same time flashy pseudo-scientific trimmings , a messianic eloquence , an unfettering of appetites that have disfigured it . Nothing entitles one to assure the workers that science is on their side . Science is for them , as indeed for everyone today , that mysterious power which has , in a single century , transformed the face of the world through industrial technique ; when they are told that science is on their side , they immediately think they possess an unlimited source of power . Nothing of the kind ! You do not find among the communists , socialists or trade-unionists of this or that tendency any clearer or more accurate knowledge of our society and its mechanism than you do among the bourgeois , conservatives or fascists . Even if the workers ’ organizations were superior in the matter of knowledge , which is not at all the case , they would not for that reason have in their hands the indispensable means of action ; science is nothing , in actual fact , without technical resources , and it does not bestow them , it only enables one to make use of them . It would be still more erroneous to maintain that science makes it possible to predict the triumph of the workers ’ cause in the near future ; it is not so , and you can not even believe in good faith that it is so unless you resolutely shut your eyes . Nothing entitles one either to assure the workers that they have a mission , an “ historic task ” , as Marx used to say ; that it is up to them to save the world . There is no reason to attribute to them such a mission , any more than to the slaves of antiquity or the serfs of the Middle Ages . Like the slaves , like the serfs , they are unhappy , unjustly so ; it is well that they defend themselves ; it would be better if they could liberate themselves ; and that is all that can be said about it . These illusions that are showered on them , in a language that mixes together religious and scientific commonplaces in deplorable fashion , are fatal to them . For they lead them to believe that things are going to be easy , that they have a modern god called Progress to push them from behind and a modern providence called History to do the donkey work for them . Finally , nothing entitles one to promise them , at the end of their liberation effort , enjoyments and power . A certain facile irony has done considerable harm by pouring cold water on the lofty idealism , the almost ascetic spirit animating socialist groups at the beginning of the nineteenth century ; it has only succeeded in degrading the working class . 1June 1936 . 2This text forms , perhaps , a new version of the beginning of Reflections on the Causes of Liberty and Social Oppression . ( ED . ) FRAGMENTS,1 LONDON 1943 I Contradiction in matter is imaged by the clash between opposing forces . That movement towards the good , through contradictions , which Plato described as being that of the thinking creature aided by a supernatural grace , was attributed by Marx purely and simply to matter , but to a certain type of matter—social matter . He was struck by the fact that social groups manufacture moralities for their own use , thanks to which the specific activity of each one is placed outside the reach of evil . There is thus the morality of the soldier , that of the business man , and so on , whose first article consists in denying that it is possible to commit any evil while waging war , doing business , etc. , according to the rules . Furthermore , all the conceptions that are current in any society whatsoever are influenced by the specific morality of the group which dominates that society . That is something which has always been known , and of which Plato , for example , was fully aware . Once it has been recognized , there are several ways of reacting to it , according to the depth of one ’ s moral uneasiness . It can be recognized as far as others are concerned , but ignored as far as oneself is concerned . This simply means that one accepts as an absolute value the specific morality of the social group of which one happens to be a member . One ’ s mind is then at rest ; but morally speaking one is dead . This happens very frequently . Or else one may realize the miserable weakness of every human mind ; one is then seized with anguish . Some , in order to escape from this anguish , are ready to allow the words “ good ” and “ evil ” to lose all significance : such people at the end of a longer or shorter time rot away , become putrefied . This is perhaps what would have happened to Montaigne but for the influence of his Stoic friend . Others seek anxiously , desperately , a road by which to escape from the sphere of relative moralities and know the absolute good . Amongst these one can name men of very unequal merit , such as Plato , Pascal and , however strange it may seem , Marx . The true road exists . Plato and many others have followed it . But it is open only to those who , recognizing themselves to be incapable of finding it , give up looking for it , and yet do not cease to desire it to the exclusion of everything else . To these it is given to feed on a good which , being situated outside this world , is not subject to any social influence whatever . It is the transcendental bread mentioned in the original text of the Lord ’ s Prayer . Marx went in search of something else , and believed he had found it . Since lies in moral affairs emanate from individual groups each of which seeks to posit its own existence as an absolute good , he told himself that on the day when there were no more individual groups there would be no more lies . He assumed , quite arbitrarily , that the collision between social forces would automatically bring about this destruction of groups . Feeling irresistibly that a knowledge of justice and truth is in some sort man ’ s due , for his craving for them is too deeply seated to admit of a refusal ; having rightly recognized that no human mind , without any exception , has sufficient strength to escape from the factors of falsehood which poison social life ; unaware that there exists a source whence such strength descends upon those who desire it with complete humility , he assumed that society , by an automatic process of growth , would eliminate its own toxins . He assumed it without any reason save that he could not do otherwise . It is thus that we must understand what often appears in him as the negation of the very concepts of truth , justice , moral value . Since society is still poisoned , no mind is capable of attaining to truth and justice . Those who utter these words are liars or dupes of liars . He who desires to serve justice has only one method , namely , to hasten forward the operation of the mechanism that will bring about a non-poisoned society . It matters little what means he employs to this end ; they are good , provided they are effective . Thus Marx , exactly in the same way as the business men of his time or the warriors of the Middle Ages , arrived at a morality which placed the social category to which he belonged—that of professional revolutionaries—above sin . He fell into the very weakness which he had tried so hard to avoid , as happens to all who seek moral strength where it is not to be found . As for the nature of this mechanism for producing paradise , he deduced it by an almost puerile form of reasoning . When a dominant group ceases to dominate , it is replaced by another group which previously found itself naturally lower in the scale . As this process is repeated , social development finally brings the very lowest group to the top . Then there is no longer anything below , no more oppression ; there are no more group interests opposed to the general interest , no more lies . In other words , as the result of an evolution in the course of which force has changed hands , one day the weak , having remained such , will have force on their side . Here we have a particularly absurd example of the tendency to extrapolate which was one of the defects of the science and of all the thought of the nineteenth century , when , except among pure mathematicians , the notion of limit was unknown . When force changes hands , it still remains a relation of stronger to weaker , a relation of dominance . It can go on changing hands indefinitely , without a single term of the relation being eliminated . At the moment when a political transformation occurs , those who make ready to take over power are already in possession of a force , that is to say a dominance over weaker men . If they possess none at all , power will not pass into their hands , unless an effective factor other than force should intervene ; which Marx did not admit as possible . In short , Marx ’ s revolutionary materialism consists in positing , on the one hand , that force alone governs social relations to the exclusion of anything else , and , on the other hand , that one day the weak , while remaining the weak , will nevertheless be the stronger . He believed in miracles without believing in the supernatural . From a purely rationalist point of view , if one believes in miracles , it is better to believe in God as well . What lies at the bottom of Marx ’ s thought is a contradiction . Which does not mean to say that absence of contradiction is a criterion of truth . Quite the opposite ; contradiction , as Plato knew , is the sole instrument of developing thought . But there is a legitimate and an illegitimate use of contradiction . The illegitimate use consists in combining incompatible assertions as if they were compatible . The legitimate use consists , when the human intelligence is faced with the necessity of accepting two incompatible truths , in recognizing them as such , and in making of them as it were the two arms of a pair of pincers , an instrument for entering indirectly into contact with the sphere of transcendent truth inaccessible to our intelligence . Contradiction handled in this way plays an essential role in Christian dogma . It would be easy to demonstrate this with regard to the Trinity , to take one example . It plays a similar role in other traditions . Here perhaps is a criterion for discerning which religious or philosophical traditions are authentic . The essential contradiction in the human condition is that man is subject to force , and craves for justice . He is subject to necessity , and craves for the good . It is not his body alone that is thus subject , but all his thoughts as well ; and yet man ’ s very being consists in straining towards the good . That is why we all believe that there is a unity between necessity and the good . Some believe that the thoughts of man concerning the good possess the highest degree of force here below ; these are known as idealists . They are doubly mistaken , first in that these thoughts are without force , and secondly in that they do not lay hold of the good . These thoughts are influenced by force ; so that this attitude is in the end a less energetic replica of the contrary attitude . Others believe that force is of itself directed towards the good ; these are idolaters . This is the belief of all materialists who do not sink into the state of indifference . They are also doubly mistaken ; first force is a stranger to and indifferent to the good , and secondly it is not always and everywhere the stronger . They alone can escape these errors who have recourse to the incomprehensible notion that there is a unity between necessity and the good , in other words , between reality and the good , outside this world . These last also believe that something of this unity communicates itself to those who direct towards it their attention and their desire—a notion still more incomprehensible , but verified experimentally . Marx was an idolater . The object of his idolatry was the society of the future ; but , since every idolater needs a present object , he transferred his idolatry to that fraction of society which he believed to be on the verge of bringing about the expected transformation—the proletariat . He considered himself to be its natural leader , at any rate as far as theory and general strategy were concerned ; but in another sense he thought he received the light from it . If he had been asked why , seeing that all thinking is subject to the fluctuations of force , he , Marx , like a great number of his contemporaries , was continually thinking of a perfectly just society , he would readily have found the answer . In his view , this was a mechanical result of the transformation that was preparing and which , although not yet accomplished , was in a sufficiently advanced state of germination to be reflected in the thoughts of a few . He interpreted in the same way the thirst for absolute justice so burningly present among the workers of that period . In a sense he was right . Nearly all the socialists of that time , himself included , would doubtless have been incapable of placing themselves on the side of the weakest if , in addition to the compassion aroused by weakness , there had not been the prestige that accompanies an appearance of force . This prestige came not from a prevision of the future but from a recent past , from a few dazzling and deceptive scenes of the French Revolution . The facts prove that nearly always men ’ s thoughts are fashioned—as Marx thought—by the lies involved in social morality . Nearly always , but not quite always . That too is certain . Twenty-five centuries ago , certain Greek philosophers , whose very names are unknown to us , affirmed that slavery is absolutely contrary both to reason and to nature . Obvious as are the fluctuations of morality in accordance with time and place , it is equally obvious also that the morality which proceeds directly from mystic thought is one , identical , unchangeable . This can be verified by turning to Egypt , Greece , India , China , Buddhism , the Moslem tradition , Christianity and the folklore of all countries . This morality is unchangeable because it is a reflection of the absolute good that is situated outside this world . It is true that all religions , without exception , have concocted impure mixtures of this morality and social morality , in varying doses . It constitutes nevertheless the experimental proof on earth that the pure transcendental good is real ; in other words , the experimental proof of the existence of God . II Marx ’ s really outstanding work is the application of his method to the study of the society around him . He defined with admirable precision the relationships of force in that society . He demonstrated that wage-earning is a form of oppression , that the workers are inevitably enslaved under a system of production where , deprived of knowledge and skill , they are reduced practically to nothing before the stupendous combination of science and natural forces which is , as it were , crystallized in the machine . He demonstrated that the State , being made up of categories of men distinct from the population—bureaucracy , police , military cadres—itself forms a machine that automatically crushes those whom it claims to represent . He perceived that economic life was itself going to become more and more centralized and bureaucratic , thus bringing together the leaders of production and those in charge of the State . These premisses ought to have led him to foresee the modern phenomenon of the totalitarian State and the nature of the doctrines that were to spring up around it . But Marx wanted this sombre mechanism to bring about justice , which is why he did not wish to foresee the future . So he accepted the most blatant absurdity , the one most opposed to his own principles . He assumed that , though everything is governed by force , a proletariat lacking force was nevertheless going to carry through a successful political coup d ’ êtat , follow it up by a purely legal measure , namely , the abolition of individual property , and as a result achieve the mastery in all fields of social life . Yet he had himself described this proletariat as despoiled of everything except its feeble hands for performing servile tasks and its ardent thirst for justice . He had shown how the forces of nature , canalized by machinery , monopolized by the masters of industrial undertakings , reduce mere muscular strength almost to nothing ; how modern culture , by fixing a gulf between manual and intellectual work , condemns the minds of the workers to banishment among objects devoid of value ; how manual skill itself had been taken away from men and transferred to the machines . He had shown with pitiless clarity that this technique , this culture , this organization of labour and of social life form the chains that keep the workers enslaved . And at the same time he wanted to believe that , with all this remaining intact , the proletariat would break its servitude and take over command . This belief is as much opposed to Marx ’ s materialist prejudices as it is to the solid , permanent part of his thought . It follows immediately from his most searching analyses that the transformation of production , intellectual culture and social organization must in general precede the overthrow of political and legal systems , as was the case in the Revolution of 1789 . But Marx refused to see this consequence , obvious as it was , because it went contrary to his desires . There was no fear of his disciples seeing it , either , for the same reason . As for the Marxist interpretation of history , nothing can be said about it , because there is none . No attempt was made to explain the evolution of civilization in terms of the development of the means of production . What is more , while positing that the class struggle is the key to history , Marx did not even attempt to show that this is a materialist principle of explanation . This is by no means self-evident . The human soul ’ s longing for liberty , its craving for power , can equally well be analysed as facts of a spiritual order . In pasting the label “ class struggle ” on to these facts , Marx merely simplified things in an almost puerile manner . He left out war , a factor in human history as important as the social struggle . Hence the fact that Marxists have always found themselves ludicrously confused before all the problems posed by war . For that matter , this omission is typical of the whole of the nineteenth century ; in committing it , Marx gave yet another proof of intellectual servility to the dominating influences of his age . Similarly , he chose to forget that the conflicts of the oppressed among themselves , of the oppressors among themselves , are as important as the mutual conflicts between oppressed and oppressors , and that in any case , more often than not , the same human being is both at once . He made oppression the central notion of his writings , but never attempted to analyse it . He never asked himself what it is . What has caused the stupendous political success of Marxism is above all this juxtaposing of two meagre , sketchy and mutually incompatible doctrines . Humanity has always placed in God its hope of quenching its thirst for justice . Once God no longer inhabited men ’ s souls , that hope had either to be discarded or to be placed in matter . Man can not bear to be alone in willing the good . He needs an all-powerful ally . If this ally is not spirit , it will be matter . It is simply a case of two different expressions of the same fundamental thought . But the second expression is defective . It is a badly constructed religion . But it is a religion . There is , therefore , nothing surprising in the fact that Marxism has always possessed a religious character . It has a great many things in common with the forms of religious life most bitterly attacked by Marx , especially in having frequently been used , to quote Marx ’ s own formula , as the opium of the people . But it is a religion devoid of mystique , in the true sense of the word . Not only materialism in general , but the brand of materialism peculiar to Marx , was bound to guarantee him an immense influence . The nineteenth century believed that in industrial production lay the key to human progress . It was the thesis upheld by the economists , the conception that enabled industrialists , without the least qualm of conscience , to bring about the death through exhaustion of generations of children . Marx simply took over this conception and transferred it to the revolutionary camp , thus preparing for the emergence of a quite singular type of bourgeois revolutionary . But it was left to our own age to make the maximum use of Marx ’ s works . The idealistic , utopian doctrine contained therein is immensely valuable for stirring up the masses , making them carry a political party to power , keeping youth in that state of permanent enthusiasm necessary to every totalitarian régime . At the same time the other doctrine , the materialist doctrine which freezes all human aspirations under the cold metallic touch of force , provides a totalitarian State with a great number of excellent answers when faced with the timid aspirations of the people . Generally speaking , the mental juxtaposition of an idealism and a materialism , each equally superficial and vulgar , constitutes the spiritual character—if one may be permitted this term—of our time . The vice of such a conception is not the combination of materialism and idealism , for they have to be combined ; it is the placing of this combination at too low a level ; for their unity dwells in a place above the skies , outside this world . Two things in Marx are solid , indestructible . One is the method which makes society an object of scientific study by seeking to define therein relationships of force ; the other is the analysis of capitalist society as it existed in the nineteenth century . The rest not only is not true , but is even too inconsistent , too empty , to be called erroneous . In omitting spiritual factors , Marx ran no risk of being greatly mistaken in his analysis of a society which , all in all , allotted them no place . At bottom , Marx ’ s materialism only expressed the influence of this society upon him ; his weakness lay in becoming himself the best instance of his own thesis concerning the subordination of thought to economic circumstances . But in his best moments he rose above this weakness . At such times materialism horrified him , and he would stigmatize it in the society of his time . He discovered a formula impossible to surpass when he said that the essence of capitalism lies in the subordination of subject to object , of man to thing . The analysis which he made of it from this point of view is of an incomparable vigour and depth ; today still , today especially , it is an infinitely valuable theme for meditation . But the general method is of still greater value . The idea of working out a mechanics of social relationships had been adumbrated by many lucid minds . It was doubtless this that inspired Machiavelli . As in ordinary mechanics , the fundamental notion would be that of force . The great difficulty is to grasp this notion . Such an idea contains nothing incompatible with the purest spirituality ; it is complementary to it . Plato compared society to a huge beast which men are forced to serve and which they are weak enough to worship . Christianity , so close to Plato on many points , contains not only the same thought , but the same image ; the beast in the Apocalypse is sister to the great beast in Plato . Working out a social mechanics means , instead of worshipping the beast , to study its anatomy , physiology , reflexes , and , above all , to try to understand the mechanism of its conditioned reflexes , that is to say find a method for training it . The essential idea in Plato—which is also that of Christianity , but has been very much neglected—is that man can not escape being wholly enslaved to the beast , even down to the innermost recesses of his soul , except in so far as he is freed by the supernatural operation of grace . Spiritual servitude consists in confusing the necessary with the good ; for “ we do not know what a distance separates the essence of the necessary from that of the good ” . The beast has one doctrine—that of force . Certain Athenians , whom Thucydides quotes , expressed it crudely , with a marvellous precision , when they said to some wretches imploring their mercy : “ We believe as concerning the gods according to tradition , and we know as concerning men from unquestionable evidence , that each one always , through a necessity of nature , commands wherever he has the power to do so. ” It is clear that these Athenians were but recent converts to the cult of the beast , the descendants of men who had been strangers to it ; the true worshippers of this cult do not reveal its doctrine , otherwise than by action . To justify such action they invent idolatries . The reverse of this doctrine , with respect to the divinity , is the dogma of the Incarnation . “ Who , being in the form of God , thought it not robbery to be equal with God : but made himself of no reputation , and took upon him the form of a servant … and became obedient unto death … ” 2 The beast is supreme on earth . The devil said to Christ : “ All this power will I give thee , and the glory of them : for that is delivered unto me … ” 3 The description of human societies purely in terms of relationships of force accounts for almost everything . The only thing it leaves out is the supernatural . The share of the supernatural here below is secret , silent , almost invisible , infinitely small . But it is decisive . Proserpina did not think she was changing her destiny by eating just one pomegranate seed ; yet from that moment , for ever after , the other world has been her home and her kingdom . This decisive operation of the infinitely small is a paradox which the human intelligence finds it difficult to acknowledge . Through this paradox is accomplished the wise persuasion that Plato speaks of , that persuasion by means of which divine Providence induces necessity to direct most things towards the good . Nature , which is a mirror of the divine truths , offers us everywhere an image of this paradox . Catalysts , bacteria are examples of it . Compared with a solid body , a point is something infinitely small . Yet , in each body , there is one point which predominates over the entire mass , for if the point is supported the body does not fall ; that point is the centre of gravity . But a point thus supported only prevents a mass from falling if the mass is disposed symmetrically around it , or if the asymmetry in it has certain proportions . Yeast only makes the dough rise if it is mixed with it . The catalyst only acts when in contact with the reactive elements . In the same way there exist certain material conditions for the supernatural operation of the divine that is present on earth in the form of something infinitely small . The wretchedness of our condition subjects human nature to a moral form of gravity that is constantly pulling it downwards , towards evil , towards a total submission to force . “ And God saw … that every imagination of the thoughts of his [ man ’ s ] heart was only evil continually. ” 4 It is this gravity which forces man , on the one hand , to lose half his soul , according to an ancient proverb , the day he becomes a slave , and , on the other hand , to command always , according to the words quoted by Thucydides , wherever he has the power to do so . In the same way as ordinary gravity , it has its laws . When studying them , one can not be too cold-blooded , lucid , cynical . In this sense , to this extent , one must be a materialist . However , an architect not only studies falling bodies , but also the conditions for equilibrium . The true knowledge of social mechanics implies that of the conditions under which the supernatural operation of an infinitely small quantity of pure good , placed at the right point , can neutralize gravity . Those who deny the reality of the supernatural truly resemble blind men . Light , too , exerts no pressure , has no weight ; but by its means the plants and trees reach towards the sky in spite of gravity . We do not eat it ; but the seeds and fruits that we eat would not ripen without it . Similarly , the purely human virtues would not spring up out of man ’ s animal nature without the supernatural light of grace . When man turns away from this light , a slow , progressive , but relentless decomposition finally subjects him altogether , right in the very depths of his soul , to the sway of force . As far as it is possible for a thinking creature , he becomes matter . In the same way a plant deprived of light is gradually changed into something inert . Those who think that the supernatural , by definition , operates in an arbitrary fashion , incapable of being studied , are as wrong about it as are those who deny its reality . The true mystics , like St John of the Cross , describe the operation of grace on the soul with the precision of a chemist or a geologist . The influence of the supernatural on human societies , although perhaps still more mysterious , can no doubt also be studied . If we examine closely not only the Middle Ages of Christendom , but all the really creative civilizations , we notice how each one , at any rate for a time , had at its very centre an empty space reserved for the purely supernatural , the reality that lies outside this world . Everything else was oriented towards this empty space . There are not two methods of social architecture . There has never been more than one . It is eternal . But it is always the eternal which calls for a truly inventive effort on the part of the human spirit . This consists of disposing the blind forces of social mechanics around the point that also serves as centre for the blind forces of celestial mechanics , that is to say the “ Love which moveth the sun and the other stars ” . It is certainly no easy thing , either to conceive in a more precise manner or to accomplish . But at any rate the first condition for moving in this direction is to let one ’ s thoughts dwell on it . It is not one of those things that can be obtained by accident . Maybe one can receive it after desiring it long and persistently . The imitation of the order of the world was the great conception of pre-Roman antiquity . It should also have been the great conception behind Christianity , since the perfect model proposed for each man ’ s imitation was the same being as the Wisdom ordering the universe . And in fact this conception did stir subterraneously the whole of the Middle Ages . Today , after being bemused for several centuries with pride in technical achievement , we have forgotten the existence of a divine order of the universe . We do not realize that labour , art and science are only different ways of entering into contact with it . If the humiliation produced by unhappiness were to rouse us , if we were to re-discover this great truth , we should be able to put an end to what constitutes the scandal of modern thought , the hostility between religion and science . 1 These are composed of loose pages found among Simone Weil ’ s papers after her death , which we publish as they stand . Certain passages in them figure again in the last essay of the book . ( ED . ) 2 Philippians ii , 6–8 . 3 Luke iv , 6 . 4 Genesis vi , 5 . IS THERE A MARXIST DOCTRINE ? Many people declare themselves to be either opponents , or adherents , or qualified adherents of the Marxist doctrine . No one thinks of asking himself : Had Marx , in fact , a doctrine ? One can not imagine that something which has excited so much controversy might not exist . Yet such is frequently the case . The question is worth raising and examining . Perhaps , after an attentive examination , we shall find that a negative answer is called for . It is generally agreed that Marx was a materialist . He was not always so at all stages of his career . As a young man , he had set out to work out a philosophy of labour in a spirit very closely akin , at bottom , to that of Proudhon . A philosophy of labour is not materialist . It arranges all the problems connected with man around an act which , constituting a direct and genuine grip on matter , contains man ’ s relation to the opposing term . The opposing term is matter . Man is not reduced to it ; he is placed in opposition to it . Along this road , the youthful Marx did not even begin the sketch of a sketch . All he supplied were a few indications . Proudhon , for his part , only shed thereon a few flashes amid much smoke . Such a philosophy remains to be worked out . It is perhaps indispensable . It is perhaps more particularly a need of our time . There are a number of signs indicating that in the last century the germ of it was in process of formation . But nothing came of this . Possibly it is something that is reserved for our century to accomplish . Marx was checked when still a young man by an accident very common in the nineteenth century ; he began to take himself seriously . He was seized with a sort of messianic illusion which made him believe that he had been chosen to play a decisive role for the salvation of mankind . Thenceforward it was impossible for him to preserve the ability to think in the full sense of the word . He abandoned the philosophy of labour that was germinating in his mind , although he continued , less and less often as time went on , to include here and there in his writings formulas inspired by it . Being unable to work out a doctrine , he seized upon the two beliefs most current in his time , both of them meagre , superficial , mediocre and furthermore impossible to conceive in conjunction : the cult of science and utopian socialism . In order to adopt them together , he gave them a fictitious unity by means of formulas which , if one enquires into their meaning , eventually fail to reveal any , except a sentimental state of mind . But when an author chooses his words with skill , the reader is rarely ungracious enough to raise such a question . The less meaning a formula possesses , the thicker is the veil drawn over the illegitimate contradictions of a line of thought . This does not mean , of course , that Marx ever set out intentionally to deceive the public . The public he had to deceive in order to be able to live was himself . That is why he surrounded the basis of his conception with metaphysical clouds which , after one has looked at them fixedly for a certain length of time , become transparent , but reveal themselves to be empty . However , he did not merely give a fictitious connection to the two systems that he had taken over ready-made , he also thought them out afresh . His mind , though of insufficient range to meet the requirements for creating a doctrine , was capable of ideas of genius . In his works there are compact fragments whose truth is unchanging , and which naturally have their place in any true doctrine . Thus it is that they are not only compatible with Christianity , but of infinite value to it . They must be taken back from Marx . This is all the easier in that what nowadays goes by the name of Marxism , that is to say the current of thought which claims to stem from Marx , makes no use of them at all . Truth is too dangerous to touch . It is an explosive . The nineteenth-century cult of science consisted in the belief that the science of the period , by means of a simple development in certain directions already defined by the results achieved , would provide a definite answer to all the problems that could present themselves to man , without exception . What has , in fact , happened is that science , after expanding a little , has itself “ cracked up ” . The science in favour today , although derived from the former , is a different science . Nineteenth-century science has been reverently deposited in the museum under the label “ classical science ” . It was well constructed , simple and homogeneous . Mechanics was its queen . Physics was its core . As this last was the branch in which by far the most brilliant results had been achieved , it naturally exercised considerable influence over all other studies . The idea of studying mankind in the same way as the physicist studies lifeless matter was bound thenceforth to impose itself , and was in fact extremely widespread . But man was hardly thought of except as an individual . Matter was now the flesh ; or else there was an attempt to define a psychological equivalent of the atom . Those who reacted against this obsession with the individual were also in reaction against the cult of science . Marx was the first and , unless I am mistaken , the only one—for his researches were not followed up—to have the twin idea of taking society as the fundamental human fact and of studying therein , as the physicist does in matter , the relationships of force . Here we have an idea of genius , in the full sense of the word . It is not a doctrine ; it is an instrument of study , research , exploration and possibly construction for every doctrine that is not to risk crumbling to dust on contact with a truth . Having had this idea , Marx hastened to render it barren , as far as lay with him , by plastering over it the wretched cult of science of his time . Or rather , Engels , who was far inferior to him and knew it , performed this operation for him ; but Marx covered it with his authority . The result was a system according to which the relationships of force that define the social structure entirely determine both man ’ s destiny and his thoughts . Such a system is ruthless . Force counts for everything there ; it leaves no hope for justice . It does not even leave the hope of conceiving justice in its truth , since all that thoughts do is to reflect the relationships of force . But Marx was a generous soul . The sight of injustice made him suffer really , one might say in his flesh . This suffering was intense enough to have made it impossible for him to live had he not harboured the hope of an imminent and earthly reign of complete justice . For him , as for many , need was the best of proofs . The majority of human beings do not question the truth of an idea without which they would literally be unable to live . Arnolphe did not question the faithfulness of Agnès . The supreme test for every soul is perhaps this choice between truth and life . Whosoever will save his life shall lose it . This sentence would be frivolous if it affected only those who under no circumstances are prepared to die . They are , in fact , quite rare . It becomes terrible when applied to those who refuse to part with the ideas—even should they be false—without which they feel themselves incapable of living . The current conception of justice in Marx ’ s day was that of the socialism which he himself named utopian . It was very poor in intellectual effort , but as a sentiment it was noble and humane , desiring liberty , dignity , well-being , happiness and every possible good for all . Marx adopted it . He attempted merely to give it greater precision , and so tacked some interesting ideas on to it , but nothing really of the first order . What he did change was the character of hope . A probability based on human progress could not suffice him . To assuage his anguish , a certitude was necessary . You can not base a certitude upon man . If the eighteenth century harboured this illusion at times—and it did so only at times—the upheavals caused by the French Revolution and war had been sufficiently appalling to cure men of it . In previous centuries , those who required a certitude rested it on God . Eighteenth-century philosophy and the wonders of technical science seemed to have carried man to such heights that the habit of doing so had been lost . But later on , when the radical inadequacy of everything human began to be felt once more , it became necessary to seek for a support . God was out of fashion . So matter was taken . Man can not bear for more than a moment to be alone in willing the good . He needs an all-powerful ally . If you do not believe in the remote , silent , secret omnipotence of a spirit , there remains only the manifest omnipotence of matter . Herein lies the inevitable absurdity of all materialism . If the materialist could set aside all concern for the good , he would be perfectly consistent . But he can not . The very being of man is nothing else but a perpetual straining after an unknown good . And the materialist is a man . That is why he can not prevent himself from ultimately regarding matter as a machine for manufacturing the good . The essential contradiction in human life is that man , with a straining after the good constituting his very being , is at the same time subject in his entire being , both in mind and in flesh , to a blind force , to a necessity completely indifferent to the good . So it is ; and that is why no human thinking can escape from contradiction . Contradiction itself , far from always being a criterion of error , is sometimes a sign of truth . Plato knew this . But the cases can be distinguished . There is a legitimate and an illegitimate use of contradiction . The illegitimate use lies in coupling together incompatible thoughts as if they were compatible . The legitimate use lies , first of all , when two incompatible thoughts present themselves to the mind , in exhausting all the powers of the intellect in an attempt to eliminate at least one of them . If this is impossible , if both must be accepted , the contradiction must then be recognized as a fact . It must then be used as a two-limbed tool , like a pair of pincers , so that through it direct contact may be made with the transcendental sphere of truth beyond the range of the human faculties . The contact is direct , though made through an intermediary , in the same way as the sense of touch is directly affected by the uneven surface of a table over which you pass , not your hand , but your pencil . The contact is real , though belonging to the number of things that by nature are impossible , for it is a case of a contact between the mind and that which is not thinkable . It is supernatural , but real . There is an equivalent , an image as it were , very frequent in mathematics , of this legitimate use of contradiction as a means of reaching the transcendental . It plays an essential role in Christian dogma , as one can perceive with reference to the Trinity , the Incarnation , or any other example . The same applies to other traditions . It provides , perhaps , a criterion for discerning which religious and philosophical traditions are authentic . It is , above all , the fundamental contradiction , that between the good and necessity , or its equivalent , that between justice and force , whose use constitutes a criterion . As Plato said , an infinite distance separates the good from necessity . They have nothing in common . They are totally other . Although we are forced to assign them a unity , this unity is a mystery ; it remains for us a secret . The genuine religious life is the contemplation of this unknown unity . The manufacture of a fictitious , mistaken equivalent of this unity , brought within the grasp of the human faculties , is at the bottom of the inferior forms of the religious life . To every genuine form of the religious life there corresponds an inferior form , which is based to all appearances on the same doctrine , but has no understanding of it . But the converse is not true . There are ways of thinking that are compatible only with a religious life of inferior quality . In this respect the whole of materialism , in so far as it attributes to matter the automatic manufacture of the good , is to be classed among the inferior forms of the religious life . This is demonstrated even in the case of the bourgeois economists of the nineteenth century , the apostles of liberalism , who adopt a truly religious accent when they talk about production . It is demonstrated to a far greater degree still in the case of Marxism . Marxism is a fully-fledged religion , in the impurest sense of the word . In particular it shares in common with all inferior forms of the religious life the fact of having been continually used , according to Marx ’ s perfectly accurate expression , as an opium of the people . For that matter , only a shade of difference , something infinitely small , separates a spirituality like Plato ’ s from materialism . He does not say that the good is an automatic product of necessity , but that the Spirit has domination over necessity through persuasion ; it persuades necessity to cause most of the things that take place to turn towards the good , and necessity is overcome by means of this wise persuasion . Similarly , in the words of Aeschylus : “ God does not arm himself with any violence . Everything that is divine is effortless . Dwelling on high , his wisdom yet succeeds in operating from thence , from his pure throne. ” We find the same conception in China , in India , in Christianity . It is expressed in the first line of the Lord ’ s Prayer , which it would be better to translate : “ Our Father , the one in heaven ” ; and even better by the wonderful words : “ Your Father which is in secret. ” The share of the supernatural here on earth is that of secrecy , silence , the infinitely small . But the operation of that something infinitely small is decisive . Proserpina did not think she was committing herself to anything when , yielding partly to constraint , partly to enticement , she consented to eat just one pomegranate seed ; but from that moment , for ever after , the other world was her kingdom and her motherland . A pearl in a field can scarcely be seen . The grain of mustard seed is the smallest of all the seeds . The decisive operation of the infinitely small is a paradox ; the human intelligence has difficulty in acknowledging it ; but nature , which is a mirror of the divine truths , everywhere presents us with images of it . Catalysts , bacteria , fermenting agents are examples . Compared with a solid body , a point is something infinitely small . Yet , in each body , there is one point which predominates over the entire mass , so that if that point receives support , the body does not fall . The keystone supports a whole building from above . Archimedes said : “ Give me a point of leverage and I will lift the world. ” The silent presence of the supernatural here below is that point of leverage . That is why , in the early centuries of Christianity , the Cross was compared to a balance . If an island completely cut off had never had any other than blind inhabitants , light would be for them what the supernatural is for us . One is tempted to think at first that for them it would be nothing , that by creating for their use a system of physics with all theory of light left out , one would be giving them a complete explanation of their world . For light offers no obstacle , exerts no pressure , is weightless , can not be eaten . For them , it is absent . But it can not be left out of account . By it alone the trees and plants reach towards the sky in spite of gravity . By it alone seeds , fruits , all the things we eat , are ripened . In assigning a transcendental unity to the good and to necessity , one gives an incomprehensible solution to the fundamental human problem , especially when one adds thereto—as is indispensable—the still more incomprehensible belief that something of this transcendental unity is communicated to those who , without understanding it , without being able to make any use either of their intelligence or of their will in regard to it , contemplate it with love and desire . That which escapes the human faculties can not , by definition , be either verified or refuted . But consequences follow from it which are situated at the lower level , in the sphere accessible to our faculties ; these consequences can be submitted to a verification . In point of fact , this test is successful . A second indirect verification arises out of universal consent . On the surface , the extreme variety of religions and philosophies would seem to indicate that this test is non-existent ; this consideration has even led many minds into scepticism . But a closer examination reveals that , except in countries that have subordinated their spiritual life to imperialism , a mystic doctrine lies at the secret core of every religion ; and although the mystic doctrines differ from each other , they are not only similar but absolutely identical as regards a certain number of essential points . A third indirect verification is inward experience . It is an indirect test , even for those who make the experiment , in the sense that it is an experience which escapes their faculties ; they grasp only the exterior aspect of it and know it . Nevertheless , they also know its significance . Throughout past centuries there has been a very small number of human beings , obviously incapable not only of lying but also of self-deception , whose testimony in this matter is decisive . These three tests are perhaps the only possible ones ; but they are sufficient . One can add to them the equivalent of a reductio ad absurdum by examining the other solutions , those which manufacture a fictitious unity for the good and for necessity at the level of the human faculties . They give rise to absurd consequences , whose absurdity can be verified both by reasoning and by experience . Among all these inadequate solutions , far the best , the most useful , the only ones perhaps which contain some fragments of pure truth , are the materialist solutions . Materialism accounts for everything , with the exception of the supernatural . This is no small gap , for in the supernatural everything is contained and infinitely surpassed . But if one leaves the supernatural out of account , one is right to be a materialist . This universe , minus the supernatural , is only matter . In describing it solely as matter , one seizes upon a particle of truth . In describing it as a combination of matter and of specifically moral forces belonging to this world , that are on a level with nature , one falsifies everything . That is why , for a Christian , Marx ’ s writings are of much greater value than those , for example , of Voltaire and the Encyclopedists , who found a way of being atheists without being materialists . They were atheists , not only in the sense that they more or less definitely excluded all notion of a personal God—which is also the case with certain Buddhist sects that in spite of this have raised themselves up to the mystical life—but in the sense that they excluded everything which is not of this world . They believed—these simpletons—that justice is of this world . This forms the extremely dangerous illusion contained in what are called the principles of 1789 , non-religious faith and so on . Among all the forms of materialism , the works of Marx contain one extremely valuable indication , although he himself made hardly any real use of it , and his followers even less , much less—the idea of nonphysical matter . Marx , rightly regarding society as being the human fact of primary importance in this world , directed his attention only to social matter ; but one may similarly consider , in the second place , psychological matter ; several trends in modern psychology point in this direction , although , unless I am mistaken , the notion of it has not been formulated . A certain number of current prejudices prevent this from being done . The idea is this ; it is indispensable to any well-founded doctrine ; it is central . Under all the phenomena of a moral order , whether collective or individual , there is something analogous to matter properly so called . Something analogous ; not matter itself . That is why the systems which Marx classified under what he called mechanical materialism , with a touch of justifiable disdain—systems which set out to explain the whole of human thought on the basis of a physiological mechanism—are nothing but nonsense . Thoughts are subject to a mechanism which is proper to themselves ; but it is a mechanism . When we think of matter , we think of a mechanical system of forces subject to a blind and rigorous necessity . The same applies to that non-tangible matter which is the substance of our thoughts . Only it is very difficult to grasp therein the notion of force and to conceive the laws of this necessity . However , even before arriving at that stage , it is already extremely useful to know that this specific necessity exists . It enables us to avoid two mistakes into which we are continually falling , for as soon as we get away from the one we fall into the other . The first is the belief that moral phenomena are exact copies of material phenomena ; for example , that moral well-being results automatically and exclusively from physical well-being . The other is the belief that moral phenomena are arbitrary and can be brought about by auto-suggestion or suggestion from without , or indeed by an act of will . They are not subject to physical necessity , but they are subject to necessity . They are exposed to the repercussion of physical phenomena , but it is a specific repercussion , in conformity with the specific laws of that necessity to which they are subject . Everything that is real is subject to necessity . There is nothing more real than the imagination ; what is imagined is not real , but the state of mind in which imagining occurs is a fact . Given a certain state of imagining , this state can only be modified if the causes capable of producing such an effect are brought into play . These causes have no direct connection with the things imagined ; but , on the other hand , they are not just anything . The relation between cause and effect is as rigorously determined in this field as it is in that of gravity . Only it is harder to know . The mistakes made on this point are countless and are the cause of countless sufferings in daily life . For example , if a child says he isn ’ t feeling well , is kept away from school , and all of a sudden finds the strength to play with some little friends , his indignant family think he has been lying . They say to him : “ Since you had the strength to play , you had the strength to work ” . But the child may very well have been sincere . He was held back by a genuine feeling of exhaustion which the sight of his little friends and the attraction of playing with them have truly dissipated , whereas school lessons did not contain a sufficient stimulus to produce this effect . Similarly , it is naïve of us to be astonished when we firmly make a resolution and do not stick to it . Something stimulated us to make the resolution , but that something was not powerful enough to bring us to the point of carrying it out ; what is more , the very act of making a resolution may have exhausted the stimulus and thus prevented even a start being made in carrying it out . This is what often happens when extremely difficult actions have to be undertaken . The well-known case of St Peter is probably an example . This type of ignorance is continually stepping in to vitiate the relations between governments and peoples , between the ruling classes and the masses . For example , industrialists can only think of two ways of rendering their workers happy : either by raising their wages , or else by telling them they are happy and sacking the wicked communists who assure them to the contrary . They are unable to understand that , on the one hand , a workman ’ s happiness consists above all in a certain attitude of mind towards his work ; and that , on the other hand , this attitude of mind can be brought about only if certain objective conditions—impossible to know without making a serious study of the subject—have been fulfilled . This twin truth , suitably transposed , is the key to all the practical problems of human existence . In the operation of this necessity which governs men ’ s thoughts and actions , the relations between society and the individual are very complex . But the primacy of the social is obvious . Marx was right to begin by positing the reality of a social matter , of a social necessity , of whose laws one must at any rate have caught a glimpse before venturing to reflect on the destinies of the human race . This idea was original in relation to his time ; but , absolutely speaking , it is not original . Indeed , it is probable that no truth is really original . The true intention of Machiavelli , a man of genius , was probably to work out a mechanics of social relations . But much farther back Plato had the reality of social necessity constantly present in his mind . Plato felt above all very strongly that social matter is an infinitely greater obstacle to overcome between the soul and the good than the flesh properly so called . That is also the Christian conception . St Paul says that we have to war not against the flesh , but against the devil ; and the devil is on his own ground in social matter , since he was able to say to Christ , as he showed him the kingdoms of this world : “ All this power will I give thee , and the glory of them : for that is delivered unto me … ” That is why he is called the Prince of this world . Since he is the father of lies , this means , then , that social matter is the cultural and proliferating medium par excellence for lies and false beliefs . Such is certainly Plato ’ s conception . He compared society to a huge beast which men are forced to serve and whose reflexes they study in order to derive therefrom their beliefs concerning good and evil . Christianity retained this image . The beast in the Apocalypse is sister to the one in Plato . The central , fundamental conception in Plato—which is also a Christian conception—is that all men are absolutely incapable of having on the subject of good and evil opinions other than those dictated by the reflexes of the beast , except for predestined souls whom a supernatural grace draws towards God . He did not develop this conception to any extent , although it is present behind all his writings , no doubt because he knew that the beast is wicked and revengeful . It provides a subject for reflection that is almost unexplored . Not that we have here a truth which is self-evident , far from it ; it is very deeply hidden . It is hidden especially by conflicts of opinion . If two men are in violent disagreement about good and evil , it is hard to believe that both of them are blindly subject to the opinion of the society around them . In particular , he who ponders those few lines of Plato is very strongly tempted to attribute to the influence of the beast the opinions of those against whom he argues , while attributing his own to a correct view of justice and the good . But one has only understood the truth formulated by Plato when one has recognized it as true for oneself . Actually at a given period , in a given social body , the differences of opinion are far fewer than it appears . There are far more conflicts than there are differences . The most violent struggles often divide people who think exactly , or almost exactly , the same thing . Our age is very fertile in paradoxes of this kind . The common fund whence spring the various trends of opinion at any given period is the opinion of the great beast at that period . For example , during the past ten years , every political tendency , including the very tiniest little groups , was accusing all the rest , without exception , of fascism , and having the same accusation levelled at it in return ; except , of course , for those who regarded this epithet as a form of praise . Probably the epithet was always partially justified . The European great beast of the twentieth century has a pronounced taste for fascism . Another amusing example is the problem of coloured peoples . Each country waxes very sentimental over the wretched fate of those under the rule of other countries , but becomes highly indignant if any doubts are cast on the perfect happiness enjoyed by those under its own rule . There are many similar cases , in which the apparent difference between attitudes actually constitutes a sameness . Furthermore , since the beast is huge and men are tiny , each one is differently placed in relation to it . Following up Plato ’ s image , we may imagine that among those with the task of grooming it , one takes charge of a knee , another of a claw , another of the neck , another of the back . Perhaps it likes being tickled under the jaw and patted on the back . One of its attendants will consequently maintain that it is tickling which constitutes the supreme good ; another that it is patting . In other words , society is composed of groups which interlock in all sorts of ways , and social morality varies from group to group . It would be impossible to find two individuals whose social backgrounds were truly identical ; each man ’ s background is composed of a network of groups which is nowhere else repeated in exactly the same way . Thus the apparent originality of individuals does not contradict the proposition that thought is completely subordinated to social opinion . This proposition is the very one advanced by Marx . The only difference between him and Plato on this point is that he ( Marx ) is unaware of the possibility of exceptions brought about through the supernatural intervention of grace . This gap leaves the truth of a part of his researches quite intact , but is the reason why the rest is simply verbiage . Marx sought to apprehend the mechanism of social opinion . The phenomenon of professional morality supplied him with the key to it . Every professional group manufactures a morality for itself in virtue of which the exercise of the profession , so long as it conforms to the rules , is quite outside the reach of evil . This is an almost vital need , for the stress of work , whatever it may be , is in itself so great that it would be unbearable if accompanied by anxious concern about good and evil . In order to protect oneself from this , armour is necessary . Professional morality fills this role . For example , a doctor called upon to attend a man condemned to death will generally not ask himself the extremely agonizing question whether it is right to cure him . It is an accepted thing that doctors must try to cure their patients . Even for the slaves of Rome a particular morality was applicable , whereby a slave could do no wrong if acting in obedience to his master ’ s orders or in his interests . Naturally , this morality was inculcated by the masters ; but it was also largely adopted by the slaves , which is why the rebellions of slaves , considering their number and horrible misery , were rare . At the time when war was a profession , fighting men had a morality whereby any act of war , in accordance with the customs of war , and contributing to victory , was legitimate and right ; including , for example , the violation of women or the killing of children when towns were sacked , for the licence given to the soldiers on these occasions was indispensable to maintain the morale of the army . Business has its own morality in which stealing is the blackest of crimes and any profitable exchange of an article for money legitimate and right . The characteristic common to all these moralities , and to every kinds of social morality , was formulated by Plato in definitive terms : “ They call just and beautiful things that are necessary , for they do not know how great in reality is the distance which separates the essence of the necessary from that of the good. ” Marx ’ s conception is that the moral atmosphere of a given society—an atmosphere which permeates everywhere and combines with the morality peculiar to each social group—is itself composed of a mixture of group moralities whose dosage precisely reflects the amount of power exercised by each group . Thus , according as a society is ruled by great landed proprietors , or military men , or commercial men , or industrialists , or bankers , or bureaucrats , it will be wholly impregnated by the world conception bound up with the professional morality of such landed proprietors , military men , and so on . This world conception will everywhere find expression , in politics , in the laws , even in the abstract and apparently disinterested speculations of the intellectuals . Everyone will be governed by it , but no-one will be conscious of the fact , for each will think that it is a question , not of some particular conception , but of a way of thinking inherent in human nature . All this is to a large extent true and easy to verify . To cite but one example , it is curious to note the importance attached to theft in the French penal code . When accompanied by certain aggravating circumstances , it is more severely punished than the rape of children . And yet the men who drew up this code not only had money , but also children whom no doubt they loved ; if they had had to choose between losing a part of their wealth and having their children defiled , there is no reason to suppose that they would have preferred their money . But when drawing up the code they were , unbeknownst to themselves , simply the organs of social reflexes ; and in a society based on commerce , theft is the prime anti-social act.Whereas the white slave traffic , for example , is a kind of commerce ; that is why we have only with difficulty and half-heartedly brought ourselves to punish it . So many facts , however , seem to contradict the theory that it would be refuted as soon as examined , were it not that it has to be qualified by the consideration of time . Man is a conservative creature , and there is a tendency for the past to subsist by its own weight . For instance , a considerable portion of the penal code dates from a time when commerce was much more important than it is today ; thus , generally speaking , the moral atmosphere of a society contains elements originating among former ruling classes that have since disappeared or more or less fallen into decay . But the converse is true also . Just as a head of the opposition , destined to become one day prime minister , already has a following , so a more or less feeble class , but one destined soon to rule , already has around it an outline of the ideological trend that will dominate with and through it . It is in this way that Marx explained the socialism of his period , including the phenomenon Marx . He saw himself as the swallow which by its mere presence announces the near approach of spring , that is to say of the revolution . He was a portent for and of himself . The second step in his explanatory attempt consisted of a search for the mechanism of social power . This part of his thought is extremely feeble . He thought he could affirm that the relationships of force in a given society , if traces of the past are excluded , depend entirely on the technical conditions of production . These conditions being given , a society has the structure which makes the maximum production possible . In trying continually to produce more and more , it improves the conditions of production . Thus these conditions change . A moment comes when a break in continuity takes place , as when water that is being gradually heated suddenly starts to boil . The new conditions make a new structure necessary . An effective change-over of power occurs , followed , after a certain interval marked by more or less violent manifestations , by the corresponding political , legal and ideological changes . When the manifestations are violent , this is called a revolution . There is a right conception here , but , by a strange irony , it flatly contradicts Marx ’ s own political standpoint : it is that a visible revolution never takes place except to sanction an invisible revolution already accomplished . When a social class noisily seizes power , it is because it already silently possessed that power , at any rate to a very large extent ; otherwise it would not have the strength necessary to seize it . It is an obvious fact , from the moment one regards society as being governed by relationships of force . This is clearly evidenced by the French Revolution , which , as Marx himself showed , officially handed over to the bourgeoisie the power which it already possessed in fact , at any rate since the time of Louis XIV . It is further evidenced by recent revolutions which , in several countries , have placed the whole of national life under the power of the State . Before this , the State already played a vast role and was almost everything . The plain consequence to be drawn , it seems , for a partisan of the workers ’ revolution is that , before launching the workers into the adventure of a political revolution , one must try to find out if methods exist likely to enable them to lay hold silently , gradually , almost invisibly , of a considerable part of real social power ; and that one must either apply these methods if they exist , or give up the idea of a workers ’ revolution if they do not . But obvious as this consequence is , Marx did not perceive it , and that because he could not face it without losing what was for him his reason for living . For the same reason , his disciples , whether reformists or revolutionaries , were in no danger of seeing it . That is why it is possible to say , without fear of exaggeration , that as a theory of the workers ’ revolution Marxism is a nullity . The rest of his theory of social transformations is based on a number of foolish misapprehensions . The first consists in adopting , in the case of human history , Lamarck ’ s explanatory principle “ the function creates the organ ” , the principle whereby the giraffe is supposed to have made such efforts to eat bananas that its neck has been lengthened . It is the type of explanation which , without containing so much as the beginning of an indication for the solution of a problem , gives the false impression that it has been solved , and thus prevents it from being posed . The problem is to discover how it is the organs of animals find themselves adapted to needs ; by bringing forward as an answer the supposition of a tendency to adaptation inherent in animal life , you fall into the error ridiculed for all time by Molière in connection with the dormitive virtue of opium . Darwin cleaned up the problem thanks to the simple and brilliant idea of conditions of existence . It is surprising that there should be animals on the earth . But once there are , it is not surprising that there should be a correspondence between their organs and their requirements for living , for otherwise they would not live . There is no chance whatever that anyone will ever discover in some remote corner of the world a species whose exclusive diet is bananas , but which is prevented by an unfortunate physical malformation from eating them . Here is one of those all-too-obvious pieces of evidence which nobody sees until some inspired intuition makes them manifest . In actual fact , this one had been recognized by the Greeks , as is the case with almost all our ideas ; but it had afterwards been forgotten . Darwin was a contemporary of Marx . But Marx , like all scientists , was very much behindhand in matters of science . He thought he was doing a scientist ’ s work in purely and simply transferring Lamarck ’ s naïve ideas to the social sphere . He even introduced an additional arbitrary element by assuming that the function not only creates an organ capable of carrying it out , but further , roughly speaking and on the whole , the organ capable of doing so with the highest possible degree of efficiency . His sociology is based on postulates which , when submitted to the examination of reason , are found to be invalid , and which , when compared with the facts , are manifestly false . He assumes in the first place that , given the technical conditions of production , society possesses the structure capable of using them to the maximum . Why ? By virtue of what necessity should things take place in such a way that productive capacity is utilized to the maximum ? In point of fact , no one has any idea of what that maximum may be . It is only clear that there has always been a good deal of waste in all societies . But this idea of Marx ’ s is based on such vague notions that one can not even show that it is false , for lack of the ability to grasp it . Secondly , society is assumed to be continually endeavouring to improve production . This is the postulate of the liberal economists transferred from the individual to society as a whole . It can be accepted with reservations ; but , in fact , there have been many societies in which for centuries people thought only of living as their forefathers had lived before them . Thirdly , this effort is assumed to react on the actual conditions of production , and that always in such a way as to improve them . If one applies reasoning to this assertion , it is seen to be arbitrary ; if one compares it with the facts , it is seen to be false . There is no reason at all why in trying to make the conditions of production furnish a greater yield they must always be developed . One can just as easily exhaust them . That very often takes place—in the case of a mine or a field , for example . The same phenomenon occurs , from time to time , on a grand scale , and provokes great crises . It is the story of the hen with the golden eggs . Aesop knew far more about that subject than Marx . Fourthly , when this improvement has gone beyond a certain point , the social structure , which previously was the most efficient from the production point of view , is no longer so ; and , according to Marx , this fact alone necessarily results in society abandoning that structure and adopting another as efficient as possible . This is the height of arbitrary reasoning . It does not withstand a minute ’ s close examination . Certainly , of all the men who have taken part in political , social or economic changes in past centuries , not one has ever said to himself : “ I am going to bring about a change in the social structure in order that present productive capacity may be utilized to the maximum. ” Nor can one discern the least sign of any automatic mechanism which would result from the laws of social necessity and set going a transformation when productive capacity was not being fully utilized . Neither Marx nor the Marxists have ever furnished the slightest indication in this sense . Must we therefore suppose that behind human history there is an all-powerfiil spirit , a wisdom that watches over the course of events and directs it ? In that case Marx would seem to accept , without saying so , the truth recognized by Plato . There is no other way of accounting for his conception . But it remains bizarre all the same . Why should this hidden spirit watch over the interests of production ? Spirit is what tends towards the good . Production is not the good . The nineteenth-century industrialists were alone in confusing the two . The hidden spirit which directs the destinies of the human race is , however , not that of a nineteenth-century industrialist . The explanation is that the nineteenth century was obsessed by production , and especially the progress of production , and that Marx was slavishly subject to the influence of his age . This influence made him forget that production is not the good . He also forgot that it is not the only necessity , and this is the cause of a further foolishness—the belief that production is the sole factor in relationships of force . Marx purely and simply forgets war . The same thing happened to the majority of his contemporaries . The men of the nineteenth century , while gorging themselves on Béranger ’ s songs and Epinal pictures in praise of Napoleon , had almost forgotten the existence of war . Marx once thought of briefly indicating that the methods of warfare depend on the conditions of production ; but he did not perceive the converse relationship whereby the conditions of production are governed by the methods of warfare . Man can be threatened with death , either by nature or by his fellow man , and force , in the final analysis , comes down to the threat of death . When considering relationships of force , one must always think of force under its two-fold aspect of material need and of arms . The result of this oversight on Marx ’ s part has been a ridiculous confusion in Marxist circles , when confronted with war and the problems relating to war and peace . There is absolutely nothing in what is called Marxist doctrine to indicate the attitude a Marxist should adopt in regard to these problems . For a time like ours , it is a quite serious lacuna . The only form of war Marx takes into consideration is social war—open or underground—under the name of the class struggle . He even makes of it the sole principle for explaining history . Since , on the other hand , the development of production is also the sole principle of historical development , it must be supposed that these two phenomena form but one . But Marx does not say how each can be reduced to the other . Certainly the oppressed who revolt or the inferiors who want to become superiors never entertain the thought of increasing society ’ s productive capacity . The only connection one can imagine is that men ’ s permanent protest against the social hierarchy maintains society in the requisite state of fluidity for productive forces to shape it at will . In that case , the class struggle is not an active principle , but merely a negative condition . The active principle remains that mysterious spirit which watches over the maintenance of production at the maximum level , and which Marxists sometimes refer to , in the plural , as the productive forces . They take this mythology with the utmost seriousness . Trotsky wrote that the 1914–18 war was in reality a revolt of the productive forces against the limitations of the capitalist system . One may ponder for a long time over such a pronouncement , wondering what it means , until one is forced to admit that it has no meaning . Yet Marx was right in regarding the love of liberty and the love of domination as the two motive-springs which keep social life in a permanent state of unrest . Only he forgot to prove that that is a materialist principle of explanation . It is not self-evident . The love of liberty and the love of domination are two human facts which can be interpreted in several different ways . Furthermore , these two facts have a far wider bearing than the relation of oppressed to oppressor , which alone held Marx ’ s attention . You can not make use of the notion of oppression without having first made a serious effort to define it , for it is not clear . Marx did not take the trouble to do this . The selfsame men are oppressed in certain respects , oppressors in certain other respects ; or again may desire to become so , and this desire can override the desire for liberty ; and the oppressors , for their part , think far less often about keeping those under them obedient than of getting the better of their equals . Thus there is not the counterpart of a battle with two sides opposing each other , but rather an extraordinarily complicated tangle of guerilla forces . This tangle is nevertheless governed by laws . But they remain to be discovered . Marx ’ s only real contribution to social science lies in the submission that such a science is needed . That is already a good deal ; it is in fact immense ; but we are still where he left us . This science is still needed . Marx did not even get ready to begin to establish it . Much less his followers . In the term “ scientific socialism ” , which is Marxism ’ s own way of describing itself , the epithet “ scientific ” corresponds to nothing but a fiction . One would even be tempted to say more crudely a lie ; only that Marx and the majority of his followers did not intend to lie . If these men had not been in the first place their own dupes , one would have to designate as a swindle the operation by which they have converted to their own exclusive benefit the respect felt for science by the men of today . Marx was incapable of any real effort of scientific thought , because that did not interest him . All this materialist was interested in was justice . He was obsessed by it . His admirably clear view of social necessity was of a kind to plunge him into despair , since it is a necessity powerful enough to prevent men , not only from obtaining , but even from conceiving justice . He did not want anything to do with despair . He felt in himself , irresistibly , that man ’ s desire for justice is too deeply implanted to admit of a refusal . He took refuge in a dream wherein social matter itself takes charge of the two functions that it denies man , namely , not only to accomplish justice , but to conceive it . He labelled this dream “ dialectical materialism ” . This was sufficient to shroud it in mystery . These two words are of an almost impenetrable emptiness . A very amusing game—though rather a cruel one—is to ask a Marxist what they mean . All the same , by searching hard , one can discover a sort of meaning in them . Plato named dialectics that movement of the soul which , at each stage , in order to rise to the sphere above , leans for support on the irreducible contradictions of the sphere wherein it finds itself . At the end of this ascent , it is in contact with the absolute good . Contradiction in matter is imaged by the clash of forces coming from different directions . Marx purely and simply attributed to social matter this movement towards the good through contradictions , which Plato described as being that of the thinking creature drawn upwards by the supernatural operation of grace . It is easy to see how he was led to this . To begin with , he adopted unreservedly the two false beliefs to which the bourgeois of his time clung so hard : first , the confusion between production and the good , and consequently between the progress of production and progress towards the good ; and secondly , the arbitrary generalization by which the progress of production—so strongly felt in the nineteenth century—is made the permanent law of human history . Only , as opposed to the bourgeois , Marx was not happy . The thought of human misery distressed him terribly , as it does anyone who is not insensitive . He needed , by way of compensation , something catastrophic , a striking act of revenge , a punishment . He could not visualize progress as a continuous movement . He saw it as a series of violent , explosive shocks . It is certainly useless to ask oneself which was right , the bourgeoisie or he . This very notion of progress in favour during the nineteenth century is devoid of meaning . The Greeks used the word “ dialectics ” when thinking of the virtue of contradiction as support for the soul drawn upwards by grace . Since Marx , for his part , combined the material image of contradiction with the material image of the soul ’ s salvation , namely , the clashes between forces and the progress of production , he was perhaps right to use this word “ dialectics ” . But , on the other hand , this word , when coupled with the word “ materialism ” , immediately shows up the absurdity of the idea . If Marx did not feel it , that was because he borrowed the word , not from the Greeks , but from Hegel , who was already using it without any precise meaning . As for the public , it was in no danger of being shocked ; Greek thought is no longer a sufficiently living thing for that . On the contrary , the words were very suitably chosen so as to lead people to say to themselves : “ That must mean something ” . When readers or listeners have been brought to that state , they are very open to suggestion . Formerly , in adult education centres for the people , workers used sometimes to say , with a sort of timid eagerness , to intellectuals calling themselves Marxists : “ We should very much like to know what dialectical materialism is ” . There is little likelihood that they were ever satisfied . As for the mechanism of the automatic production of the absolute good through social conflicts , there is no difficulty in grasping what Marx ’ s conception of it was ; all that is very superficial . Since the origin of social lies is to be found among the groups struggling for domination or emancipation , the disappearance of such groups would abolish lies , and man would live in justice and in truth . And what is the mechanism by which these groups can be made to disappear ? It is very simple . Every time there is a social transformation , the dominant group falls and a relatively lower group takes its place . One has only to generalize ; the whole of the science , and even the thought , of the nineteenth century , suffered from that vicious habit of uncontrolled extrapolation ; except in the case of mathematics , the idea of limit was almost unknown . If each time a group lower in the scale attains to the dominant position , one day the lowest of all will do so ; thenceforth there will be no more inferiors , no more oppression , no longer a social structure composed of hostile groups , no longer any lies . Men will possess justice , and because they possess it , they will know it as it is . It is thus that we must understand the passages in which Marx seems completely to exclude the very notions of justice , truth or good . So long as justice is absent , man can not conceive it , and a fortiori he can not become possessed of it ; it can only come to him from outside . Since society is vitiated , poisoned , and the social poison permeates all men ’ s thoughts without exception , everything that men imagine under the name of justice is simply lies . Anyone who talks of justice , truth , or no matter what type of moral value , is a liar or allows himself to be hoodwinked by liars . How , then , is one to serve justice , if one does not know it ? The only way to do so , according to Marx , is to hasten forward the operation of that mechanism , inherent in the very structure of social matter , which will automatically bring men justice . It is difficult really to be sure whether Marx thought that the role of the proletariat in this mechanism , by putting it closer to the future society , communicated to it and to the writers or militants who ranged themselves on its side an initial glimpse , as it were , of the truth , or whether he regarded the proletariat simply as a blind instrument of that entity which he named “ history ” . It is probable that his thoughts fluctuated on this point . But it is certain that he regarded the proletariat , together with its allies and leaders brought in from outside , above all as an instrument . He regarded as just and good , not that which appears to be so to minds warped by the social lie , but solely that which could hasten the appearance of a society without lies ; on the other hand , in this field , everything which is effective , without exception , is perfectly just and good , not in itself , but relatively to the final goal . Thus in the end Marx fell back into that group morality which revolted him to the point of making him hate society . Like the feudal magnates of old , like the business men of his own day , he had built for himself a morality which placed above good and evil the activity of the social group to which he belonged , that of professional revolutionaries . This is what always happens . The type of moral failing that we most fear and hate , that fills us with the greatest horror , is invariably the one into which we fall , when we do not seek the source of the good in the place where it dwells . It is the snare perpetually laid for each man , and against which there is but one protection . This mechanism for producing paradise imagined by Marx is something obviously puerile . Force is a relationship ; the strong are so in relation to those weaker than themselves . It is impossible for the weak to take possession of social power ; those who take possession of social power by force always form—even before this operation—a group to which human masses are subjected . Marx ’ s revolutionary materialism consists in positing , on the one hand that everything is exclusively regulated by force , and on the other that a day will suddenly come when force will be on the side of the weak . Not that certain ones who were weak will become strong—a change that has always taken place ; but that the entire mass of the weak , while continuing to be such , will have force on its side . If the absurdity of this does not immediately strike us , it is because we think that number is a force . But number is a force in the hands of him who disposes of it , not in the hands of those who go to make it up . Just as the energy contained in coal is a force only after having passed through a steam engine , so the energy contained in a human mass is a force only for a group outside the mass , much smaller than the mass , and having established with it relations which , as a result of very close study , could perhaps be defined . It follows from this that the force of the mass is used on behalf of interests which are exterior to it , exactly as the force of an ox is used in the interests of the ploughman , or that of a horse in the interests of the rider . Someone may knock the rider off and jump into the saddle in his place , then get knocked off in his turn ; this may be repeated a hundred or a thousand times ; the horse will still have to keep on running under the prick of the spur . And if the horse unseats the rider , another will quickly take his place . Marx was perfectly well aware of all this ; he set it forth brilliantly in connection with the bourgeois State ; but he wanted to forget it when it came to the revolution . He knew that the mass is weak and only constitutes a force in the limits of others ; for , were it otherwise , there would never have been oppression . He let himself be persuaded solely by generalization , by applying the limiting process to that perpetual change which periodically sets those who were weaker in the place of those who were stronger . The limiting process , when applied to a relation one of whose terms it eliminates , is altogether too absurd . But this wretched form of reasoning sufficed for Marx , because anything suffices to persuade the man who feels that , if he were not persuaded , he could not live . The idea that weakness as such , while remaining weak , can constitute a force , is not a new one . It is the Christian idea itself , and the Cross is the illustration of it . But it has to do with a force of quite a different kind from that wielded by the strong ; it is a force that is not of this world , that is supernatural . It operates after the manner of the supernatural , decisively , but secretly , silently under the aspect of the infinitely small ; and if it penetrates the masses by radiation , it does not dwell in them , but in certain souls . Marx accepted this contradiction of strength in weakness , without accepting the supernatural which alone renders the contradiction valid . Similarly , Marx sensed a truth , an essential truth , when he realized that man can conceive justice only if he has … ( Here the manuscript , written in London in 1943 , breaks off . ) Simone Weil and Theology A. Rebecca Rozelle-Stone and Lucian Stone Bloomsbury T & T Clark An imprint of Bloomsbury Publishing Plc 50 Bedford Square London WC1B 3DP UK 175 Fifth Avenue New York NY 10010 USA www.bloomsbury.com First published 2013 © A. Rebecca Rozelle-Stone and Lucian Stone , 2013 All rights reserved . No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means , electronic or mechanical , including photocopying , recording , or any information storage or retrieval system , without prior permission in writing from the publishers . A. Rebecca Rozelle-Stone and Lucian Stone have asserted their right under the Copyright , Designs and Patents Act , 1988 , to be identified as Author of this work . No responsibility for loss caused to any individual or organization acting on or refraining from action as a result of the material in this publication can be accepted by Bloomsbury Academic or the author . British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data A catalogue record for this books is available from the British Library . ISBN : 978-0-5674-2430-3 ForThomas Alexander , Anthony Steinbock , and Stephen Tyman , three exemplary teachers who embody and inspire the love of wisdom CONTENTS Acknowledgments Abbreviations Introduction : On being a paradox 1Atheism and mysticism Crises Idolatry The Great Beast Anathema sit—Political theology Atheism as purification Mysticism 2Christology and religious pluralism Letter to a priest Christology Intimations of religious pluralism Love ’ s implicit enemies—The Jew , the Muslim 3Human nature and decreation In the beginning—Creation Human nature—The void Comfortable illusions—Evil Returning the gift—Decreation 4Love and detachment Limit of the intellect Platonic eros and divine mania Losing control and preparing to die Just attention Affliction and the impersonal Facing the other ? 5Beauty and anonymity Decentered eye , decentered I Aesthetic arrest Anonymous and bland Tragedy and the breach Perversions—Fabrications of order 6Possibility and impossibility Violent interruption The first movement of grace—Death , or the decreative event The second movement of grace—Recreation , or subjectivating inspiration The deposed The radical choice The impossible Conclusion : Educating paradox Notes Bibliography Index ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Our thinking about Simone Weil has benefited in immeasurable ways from our participation at the annual colloquies hosted by the American Weil Society . The members of the society and the participants at the annual colloquies are always patient , thoughtful , and convivial . It was during these annual meetings that many of the ideas in this present volume came to fruition , and for that we are thankful . We also want to express our appreciation and gratitude to E. Jane Doering , Larry Schmidt , and Eric O. Springsted who have been especially generous with their valuable support and considerable wisdom about Weil ’ s life and thought . Finally , we want to thank Charles Miller who is an open and attentive interlocutor on all theological matters , offering us many inspirations as we worked through ideas presented in this book . A. Rebecca Rozelle-Stone and Lucian StoneGrand Forks , ND ABBREVIATIONS FLN First and Last Notebooks , trans . Richard Rees . London : Oxford University Press , 1970 . FW Formative Writings 1929–1941 , trans . Dorothy Tuck McFarland and Wilhelmina van Ness . Amherst : University of Massachusetts Press , 1987 . GG Gravity and Grace , trans . Emma Crawford and Mario von der Ruhr . London : Routledge , 2002 . IC Intimations of Christianity among the Ancient Greeks , trans . E. C. Geissbuhler . London : Routledge , 1988 . LOP Lectures on Philosophy , trans . Hugh Price . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 1978 . LP Letter to a Priest , trans . Arthur Wills . London : Routledge , 2002 . NB The Notebooks of Simone Weil , 2 vols , trans . Arthur Wills . London : Routledge & Kegan Paul , 2004 . NR The Need for Roots , trans . Arthur Wills . London : Routledge , 2002 . OL Oppression and Liberty , trans . Arthur Wills and John Petrie . Amherst : University of Massachusetts Press , 1973 . SL Seventy Letters , trans . Richard Rees . New York : Oxford University Press , 1965 . SNL On Science , Necessity , and the Love of God , trans . Richard Rees . London : Oxford University Press , 1968 . SWA Simone Weil : An Anthology , ed . Siân Miles . New York : Weidenfeld and Nicolson , 1986 . SWC Simone Weil on Colonialism , ed . and trans . J. P. Little . New York : Rowman and Littlefield , 2003 . SWR Simone Weil Reader , ed . George A. Panichas . Wakefield , RI and London : Moyer Bell , 1977 . WG Waiting for God , trans . Emma Craufurd . New York : HarperCollins , 2001 . Introduction : On being a paradox To think on God , to love God , is nothing else than a certain way of thinking on the world . SIMONE WEIL Simone Weil once wrote , “ The Gospel contains a conception of human life , not a theology. ” 1 By this statement she did not intend a criticism . On the contrary , she was proposing a new orientation toward sacred text in which flesh and blood encounters , rather than propositions about the divine , are revealed . As philosophers , theologians , and literary critics have long understood , there are always interpretive difficulties to be faced whenever we read sacred texts , or in general , whenever we read texts that are poetic in nature . This is partly owing to the fact that a poem ( whether sanctified or not ) grants a glimpse of human life in a singular way that ruptures our usual systems of perceiving and knowing . Alain Badiou has helpfully described why contemporary audiences are especially handicapped in reading poetic texts : Poetry , alas , grows more and more distant . What commonly goes by the name of ‘ culture ’ forgets the poem . This is because poetry does not easily suffer the demand for clarity , the passive audience , the simple message . The poem is an intransigent exercise . It is devoid of mediation and hostile to the media.2 A poem , that is , can foster an epiphany but does not didactically disclose a set of facts ; poetry “ does not consist in communication , ” but it awaits us to be encountered as an event , and it even injects a kind of silence into the cacophonies that mask our banalities.3 We propose that Simone Weil ’ s approach to the Gospels is the very approach that should be taken to her own writings , poetic in mission if not in form ; she does not communicate a theology but instead reveals a conception of human life , albeit in paradoxical ways . Thinking about poetry has more to teach us , especially in preparation for encountering the writings of Simone Weil . How does a good poem come about ? Weil herself had this to say about the composition of a poem : it requires “ thought without language , for the choice of words takes place without the help of words. ” 4 In this sense , writing a poem is akin to apophasis , a playful short-circuiting of the ordinary frameworks and discourses that structure and organize our everyday thoughts and speech . Elsewhere , she contends that writing in general is “ like translating , ” since it consists of a “ negative operation ” whereby we wait , when we are composing , “ for the right word to come of itself at the end of our pen , while we merely reject all inadequate words. ” 5 This process may sound , on the one hand , too easy to be true , or on the other , an impossible task . What kind of inspiration is this ? Can this “ waiting ” really guarantee results ? Rainer Maria Rilke ( whom Weil read ) understood the difficulty of writing poetry , and in The Notebooks of Malte Laurids Brigge,6 he described a negative process that closely mirrored Weil ’ s depiction . Rilke grasped that a good poem does not simply express immediate feelings , just as it does not merely recall experiences through sentimental nostalgia , or proffer conscious reflections as such . Crucially , after many , varied , and contradictory experiences in one ’ s life , there must be a stage of forgetting that precedes what he called “ blood-remembering. ” It is from blood-remembering that good poetry falls , like words out of the tip of a pen , or like ripe fruit from an ancient tree.7 We quote him at length on the process by which one can write a verse of poetry : For the sake of a single verse , one must see many cities , men and things , one must know the animals , one must feel how the birds fly and know the gesture with which the little flowers open in the morning . One must be able to think back to roads in unknown regions , to unexpected meetings and to partings one had long seen coming ; to days of childhood that are still unexplained . . . and it is not yet enough if one may think of all this . One must have memories of many nights of love , none of which was like the others , of the screams of women in labor . . . . But one must also have been beside the dying , must have sat beside the dead in the room with the open window and the fitful noises . And still it is not yet enough to have memories . One must be able to forget them when they are many and one must have the great patience to wait until they come again . For it is not yet the memories themselves . Not till they have turned to blood within us , to glance and gesture , nameless and no longer to be distinguished from ourselves—not till then can it happen that in a most rare hour the first word of a verse arises in their midst and goes forth from them.8 A verse containing a true conception of human life , whether within poetry or sacred text , is not manufactured consciously . Given Rilke ’ s account , the requisite elements appear to be : vulnerable and attentive engagement in the world ; consent to suffer the uncertainties , contradictions , mysteries , and necessities of mortal life ; formation of thoughts and memories of those experiences ; and willingness to let go of those considerations in order for an incarnation to take place—an embodiment of the past encounters , which then seep into our movements , gazes , conversations , and , occasionally , our verses , sometimes unbeknownst to us . There is something paradoxical about detaching from our carefully constructed narratives in order for a truly inspired word to arrive , outside of our active energies . The incessant systematizing and intellectualizing of experience must at some point give way to releasing that rational control of what presented itself to our senses for it , metaphorically speaking , to “ mature on the tree. ” In addition to this detachment , then , there must also be patience for the ripening . For as Rilke also wrote , “ One ought to wait and gather sense and sweetness a whole life long , and a long life if possible , and then , quite at the end , one might perhaps be able to write ten lines that were good. ” 9 Is it not to be expected that a process which requires detachment , renunciation of will , vulnerability , and patience would yield a form that harbors the “ music of silence ” ? 10 A form that quietly folds in upon itself ? Badiou tells us that “ the poem is what Mallarmé called ‘ restrained action. ’ ” 11 It is opposed to the language of communication , information , images , and “ universal reportage , ” which is so predominant in our time . In this way , “ the poem is a halting point , ” in that “ it makes language halt within itself. ” 12 It effects a deposing of its own subject-matter through unexpected pairings and alliances and therefore effects a similar deposing of the reader of the poem . It disconcerts us . But this does not mean that the poem says nothing . Poetic writing—and we contend that Simone Weil ’ s writings fall into this category—grants access to truths , but does so precisely by denying the direct relation of thought to objects . Again , Badiou puts this well : “ The poem is a negative machinery , which utters being , or the idea , at the very point where the object has vanished. ” 13 In other words , the poem confronts us with a certain and undeniable presence , which we are disabled from objectifying . If Simone Weil ’ s writings largely do fall within the province of poetry and what has just been said about poetry , we may be better able to understand why , for philosophers and theologians who seek systems and explicable objects , Weil ’ s thought has been , as Maurice Blanchot said of her work , “ so irritating that it seems to them scarcely a thought. ” 14 She is infamously not averse to employing contradictory and paradoxical statements , such as : we must uproot ourselves , we need to be rooted ; God exists , God does not exist ; we must love that which does not exist , et cetera . Nevertheless , as with poetry , these opposing affirmations perform an important “ halting ” operation that is an altogether different procedure than the sort of mental arrest that is the product of media clichés , sophistic political rhetoric , and cheap , grotesque , ubiquitous infotainment . While the latter numbs and dulls our attunement to humans and the world around us , reinforcing mental defenses and distractions constituted by a plentitude of objectifications and easy classifications , the former , poetic way of halting thought acts instead as a ground-clearing , opening an important and necessary space for a fresh consideration of a phenomenon . The paradox “ experienced to the very depths of being tears us heart and soul , ” such that “ a kind of loosening takes place ” ; 15 in other words , it serves as a break from the mundane , ordinary way of viewing the world . It challenges our assumed categories and points to truth beyond the world of ordered and unproblematic objects . It positively creates a silence to “ speak ” what has not been spoken and what can not be spoken in the language of consensus ; it sets up a silence , therefore , in order for us to hear above the din . Patience , then , and a willingness to be deposed as sovereign subjects are requisite traits for approaching Weil ’ s writings and the ideas that are evoked therein . Additionally , we propose that the very cornerstone of her thought , especially as gleaned from her notebooks and later writings , is precisely an expression of this sort of patient waiting ( a vigilance that she often termed attention ) that demanded and further enabled the subjective deposition ( or what she called decreation ) . Attention and decreation together represent the crucial elements of the “ conception of human life ” revealed by the Gospels to Weil ’ s mind . There is no systematic elaboration of a theology in either the Gospels or in her own writings . However , as Blanchot rightly asks , “ How can one not be struck , in reading certain of her writings . . . by the tone that is hers and by the manner in which she makes her assertions : with a certitude so remote from herself , so distant from all proof and all guarantee , yet so restrained and nearly effaced that one indeed feels one can not refuse her a hearing . . . ” ? 16 That is to say , Weil is a creator of fruitful silences , but she accomplishes these by means of a series of affirmations written with an air of detached certitude , many of which do profoundly contradict one another . Blanchot is correct also when he says that Weil leaves the contradictory affirmations as they are , “ without seeming to renounce any of them , much less bring them into agreement . Affirming is often for Simone Weil a way of questioning or a way of testing. ” 17 Therefore , if we can not speak of a Weilienne theology in the usual way , we can perhaps describe the affirmations about spiritual matters that refuse systemization and coherence , as a theology that suspends itself , or what we would call a reflective-negative theology or an atheology . In order to consider her atheology as it relates to waiting , let us return for the moment to her statement , “ The Gospel contains a conception of human life , not a theology. ” This claim , written in her New York notebook in 1942 , is immediately followed by this analogy : If I light an electric torch at night out of doors I don ’ t judge its power by looking at the bulb , but by seeing how many objects it lights up . The brightness of a source of light is appreciated by the illumination it projects upon non-luminous objects . The value of a religious or , more generally , a spiritual way of life is appreciated by the amount of illumination thrown upon the things of this world . Earthly things are the criterion of spiritual things.18 A refusal to look away from the light bulb , according to Weil , causes a kind of blindness , in the same way that attempts to objectify and render visible experiences of the divine will necessarily distort , falsify , and indeed prevent any epiphanic arrival . In other words , Weil warns that we can only truthfully speak of and understand spiritual matters by patiently keeping our gaze on what can rightfully be seen—the natural phenomena we encounter on a daily basis . Nevertheless , this prescribed attention is for Weil impersonal and detached , like the movement of Rilke ’ s forgetting of constructed memories , and that detachment comes from the contradictory experiences and perspectives visited all along the way . The paradoxes and contradictions with which we are confronted ( when we are attentive to them ) prevent a greedy and facile attachment to selective experiences , memories , and claims—that is , dogmatism and absolutism . Instead , a commitment to regard everything that presents itself to our senses , fully and carefully , results in the sort of patience and clarity that permits the embodiment of the paradoxes . One may not be aware of the new disposition , but Weil argues that others will be able to see the manifestations of this transformation , or what Rilke would call the effects of blood-remembering . Simone Weil ’ s atheology is , of course , paradoxical , as we will demonstrate in Chapter 1 , because the divine can only be “ known ” through absence and void ; in fact , a particular kind of atheism may be more compatible with this approach than any orthodox theism . While Weil refrains from positing much about God or “ the supernatural , ” her frequent references and seeming affirmations of the divine are occasioned by her ruminations on “ impossible ” or paradoxical situations , as well as her own well-documented mystical experiences . But at its most , religion for Weil is simply an attentive-decreative orientation to the world . This is what she means when she says , It should also be publicly and officially recognized that religion is nothing else but a looking . Insofar as it claims to be anything else , it is inevitable that it should either be shut up inside churches , or that it should stifle everything in every other place where it is found.19 Only the world here below , including inert matter and flesh , is the universal test and filter of what is real . But this looking-at-the-world requires an apprenticeship similar to that of learning to read and write poetry . The looking that Weil calls attentiveness involves losing interested or greedy perspective , aided by the inevitable encounter of paradoxical situations and realizations . For these reasons , this book is presented to readers as a journey of looking at different paradoxical aspects of experience , particularly those that were significant to Simone Weil , seeing how they cumulatively cast the shadow of her atheology . In the following chapters , we will explore some of the most perplexing paradoxes in Weil ’ s thought , not to resolve their underlying tensions , but to make them more pronounced , so that they may do their work of ground-clearing . As we have described , this method , after all , appears to be Weil ’ s own approach to the world . As Leslie Fiedler , who introduced the English translation of Weil ’ s Attente de Dieu ( Waiting for God ) , noted , “ The outrageous ( from the natural point of view ) ethics of Christianity , the paradoxes on which it is based , are a scandal to common sense ; but we have protected ourselves against them by turning them imperceptibly into platitudes . It is Simone Weil ’ s method to revivify them , by recreating them in all their pristine offensiveness. ” 20 It is our hope that this book may evoke needed silences and fruitful spaces in contemporary theological and philosophical discourses ; enduring these voids by refusing simplistic conclusions or syntheses may well be the reader ’ s own test . 1Atheism and mysticism “ I will rise now and go about the city , in the streets and in the squares ; I will seek him whom my soul loves. ” I sought him , but found him not . SONG OF SOLOMON 3:2 You came . And you did well to come . I was waiting for you ; your fire burns my heart , it flames . I forgive you all the endless hours that you were away . SAPPHO1 Crises In his discussion about the meaning of the Torah in Jewish mysticism Gershom Scholem interjects , mid-sentence , matter-of-factly that “ mysticism as a historical phenomenon is a product of crises. ” 2 He does not go on to identify particular historical crises , describe or classify these crises , nor does he explain the causal relationship he presupposes the reader already understands and with which she concurs . He merely goes on to say : Mystics are men [ sic ] who by their own inner experience discover new layers of meaning in their traditional religion . When their experience and speculation did not lead them to break with the traditional institutions of their religion , it was inevitable that they should come to grips with two questions : how were they to find their own experience reflected and anticipated in the sacred texts ? And : how could their view of the world be brought into harmony with the view accepted by their own tradition ? 3 The figure of Simone Weil among the mystics generally speaking , and Christian mystics more specifically , both affirms and problematizes aspects of Scholem ’ s framing of mysticism as a historical phenomenon . To begin , contrary to Scholem ’ s assertion that mystical visions occur to practitioners of established religious traditions—except for some contemporary mystics who dissociate from all ties to traditional religions4—Weil , in the strictest sense , was from the outset an outsider to religious tradition . Although her family was Jewish , they were certainly not believing and practicing Jews . In fact , they were agnostic . Weil herself attests , “ I was brought up by my parents in a complete agnosticism , and I never made the slightest effort to depart from it . . . ” 5 As Leslie Fiedler notes in his introduction to Waiting for God , “ Though her ancestors had been Jewish , the faith had quite disappeared in her immediate family . . . ” 6 Weil ’ s immediate family had assimilated into secular modern French culture . Consequently , Weil ’ s thought was more influenced by classical Greek sources than the Torah.7 Toward the end of her life , in a letter written to Father Joseph-Marie Perrin in May 1942—which has since come to be referred to simply as her “ Spiritual Autobiography ” —Weil confesses that “ never at any moment ” in her life did she seek for God.8 This makes perfect sense following Scholem ’ s logic insofar as it would be peculiar for someone raised agnostic and outside of a traditional religious community to seek after that which grounds said tradition , especially as it is expressed in its sacred literature and rites . But in her retrospective overview of her own life—as she and her family fled France due to the Vichy regime and the eventual Nazi occupation—Weil makes these surprising remarks : I always adopted the Christian attitude as the only possible one . I might say I was born , grew up , and I always remained within the Christian inspiration . While the very name of God had no part in my thoughts , with regard to the problems of this world and this life I shared the Christian conception in an explicit and rigorous manner.9 In this striking passage , Weil insists that although she was not reared as a Christian within the Church—and thus , Christianity as such was not a direct influence on her thinking and social-political activities—she later came to perceive all of her thoughts and actions to have been in perfect alignment with what she deemed to be a Christian outlook . All of her thoughts and deeds , that is , were unconsciously Christian . “ From my earliest childhood , ” she wrote in the same letter , “ I always had . . . the Christian idea of love for one ’ s neighbor , to which I gave the name justice—a name it bears in many passages of the Gospel and which is so beautiful. ” 10 One might be struck by the fact that she perceived within herself a staggering consistency—one that spans from her early childhood until the last years of her life . And , indeed , commentators and scholars never tire of including detailed accounts of her biography as evidence of her spiritual aptitude and intellectual genius ; 11 for them—and we find it impossible to avoid this perspective entirely ourselves—the truth and potency of Weil ’ s thought is supported by her relentless embodiment of those ideals . Consequently , many have called her a “ saint ” 12 and her biography reads almost like hagiography—for example , at the age of five , in a show of compassion for the French troops at the front in World War I cut off from rations of sugar , “ she refused to eat sugar. ” 13 Her life is filled with such self-sacrificial decisions—often simpatico with those who suffer at the hands of injustice and affliction—until and perhaps including her untimely death . For our purposes , it is important to remember that these gestures were only latently determined to be “ Christian ” by Weil , who , prior to making this declaration , had three mystical experiences ( to which we will turn at the end of this chapter ) . Technically , then , there was no causal relationship between Christianity as such and her thoughts and actions antecedent to her mystical encounters—the first of which occurred in 1935 , when she was 26 years old . That is to say , temporally speaking , these thoughts and actions could not have been consciously informed by participation in Christian sacraments , adherence to Christian doctrine , rooted in Christian belief , committed to Christian principles , et cetera . That being said , her insistence that she was always a Christian evinces a trend in mysticism observed by Scholem , namely , after their mystical encounter ( s ) mystics seek “ to find their own experience reflected and anticipated in the sacred texts. ” But Weil extends this reading of the sacred text not only to explain her latter mystical experiences but also to reflect her prior conduct as being Christian . Thus , in the Gospels Weil finds what she previously held to be “ justice ” in its articulation of love of neighbor . In this way she roots herself within the Christian tradition . So much so , in fact , that she writes : “ Of course I knew quite well that my conception of life was Christian . That is why it never occurred to me that I could enter the Christian community . I had the idea that I was born inside. ” 14 It is this last point that brings us to Weil ’ s sense of the crises of her times and to which , perhaps , her mysticism , as Scholem hypothesized , was a direct though unintentional response . As has been mentioned , even as a child she paid uncanny attention to the social and political ills in French society such as poverty , hunger , poor working conditions , and , of course , war . As she matured , her awareness and involvement with these and related issues intensified . This development coincided with the growing disparities between the rich and the poor , the tensions between the workers and the bourgeoisie , the proliferation of bureaucratic corruptions and abuses of power , nihilism , capitalism , the rise of fascism , and , most significantly , the emergence of Hitlerism.15 Crucially , Weil ’ s explicit turn to religious thinking was not , as many might cynically presuppose , a desperate attempt to find consolation from fear and frustration caused by these worldly affairs . To her reckoning , Christianity is not—or at least properly speaking ought not to be misconstrued as—a transcendental refuge from the hardships of lived experience . Instead , Weil ’ s seizure by Christianity paradoxically rooted her more firmly in the world . She writes , Our neighbor , our friends , our religious ceremonies , and the beauty of the world do not fall to the level of unrealities after the soul has had direct contact with God . On the contrary , it is only then that these things become real . Previously they were half dreams . Previously they had no reality.16 Thus , Weil ’ s religious awakening resulted in two radical conclusions . First , Christianity—or rather , Christ—is exemplary of the unflinching attention necessary for addressing the problems in this world . Second , attention not only led her to acknowledge the spiritual crisis afflicting the world at large ( a commonplace observation for religious devotees ) but also that which contaminated religious institutions such as the Church . In this manner—and in agreement with Scholem ’ s observation—it can be said that Weil ’ s entire outlook was a direct and unflinching confrontation with the crises at hand , which included : social-political injustice , intellectual and spiritual nihilism , and the corruption of religion , especially the Catholic Church . And Weil experienced each of these personally . In the sections to follow , we examine the development of Weil ’ s diagnosis of these crises ( “ Idolatry , ” “ The Great Beast , ” and “ Religious and political anathema , ” ) , as well as her prescribed responses : “ Atheism as a form of purification , ” and “ Mysticism. ” Idolatry Weil ’ s thought was principally motivated by the perennial philosophical pursuit of truth . More specifically , she fixated on the problem of discerning reality ( truth ) from appearance ( opinion ) . Certainly , her attentiveness to the ills of the world gave urgency to this philosophical problem , for as she saw it , until this epistemological dilemma is resolved all varieties of injustices will be perpetuated and inflicted upon the world under the guises of “ truth ” or “ reality , ” and by extension “ justice , ” “ goodness , ” and “ beauty ” —and all substrate value fields that traditionally fit within these categories . As we have explained above , Weil personally felt the crises she diagnosed as afflicting human society . This epistemological-ethical issue came to a head when Weil struggled with the question of whether or not she should be baptized.17 She had a strong affinity for the holy sacraments . “ The sacraments , ” she wrote , “ have a specific value , which constitutes a mystery in so far as they involve a certain kind of contact with God , a contact mysterious but real. ” 18 In order to properly partake in sacraments such as the Eucharist , however , she would have had to be baptized—that is , to formally join the institution of the Catholic Church.19 But whereas she recognized the possibility of a real contact with God through the sacraments and other religious rituals , to her mind there is too much evidence that the Church , ironically , has a distorting effect upon the sacraments as they are institutionalized and thereby experienced by most practitioners . Consequently , she writes , “ I think that most believers . . . approach the sacraments only as symbols and ceremonies. ” 20 This , she forcefully argued , is symptomatic of the very nature of the Church as a social institution and , as consequence , instead of drawing adherents away from selfish relativity toward real contact with God , only satisfies their baseness . It is in this satisfying-function of the Church that we find clues to Weil ’ s notion of idolatry , which was ultimately shaped by her reading of Plato.21 Not surprisingly , then , she returns frequently to Plato ’ s famous allegory of the cave , especially when demonstrating the gulf between the appearance of religiosity and true religiosity.22 “ There is a distinction between those who remain inside the cave , shutting their eyes and imagining the journey , and those who really take it. ” 23 Most , she observed , either unbeknownst to themselves or despite their conscious protestations to the contrary , do not bear the mark of having truly made the journey to God ( or , Platonically speaking , truth ) . In short , people are inattentive . Attentiveness—as we will discuss in Chapter 4—is what is required to arrive at both epistemic truth and ethical practice . Weil ’ s written work as well as her activism are best seen as attempts to reorient our gaze toward immanent and transcendent truth—or necessity/suffering and God respectively . Simply put , according to Weil there is an incongruity between the individual and God born of metaphysical necessity . The very assertion of God—who for her is good before being powerful—is simultaneously the recognition of humankind ’ s derivative status . As such , every individual self , or ego , is seen in relief of God . The Christian model for humanity , which we will explore in more detail in Chapter 2 , is of course Jesus , especially as witnessed during the crucifixion . For our purposes at this time , what is most important to note is the strict dichotomy—metaphysically , epistemologically , and morally—between humans and God . ( But Weil ’ s acknowledgement of this bifurcation in no way should be interpreted as an excuse for human apathy , to not seek “ the impossible ” or to act as Jesus did . ) The ego—manifest through its earthly desires—seeks to be the center and therefore is inattentive to all else except insofar as those others or other things are mere means to the ego ’ s end . Its natural perspective is , in other words , narrow and consumptive . Theologically , this narrow perspective takes the form of forcing God ( the impossible-to-conceive and the impersonal truth ) to fit human demands and frameworks ( what is conceived of as logically possible and personally gratifying ) . But Weil cautioned : “ We must be careful about the level on which we place the infinite . If we place it on the level which is only suitable for the finite it will matter very little what name we give it. ” 24 If , then , there is an expressly theological concern for Weil , it entails the confusion of symbols and modes of religious hermeneutics and how they may or may not misappropriate ( whether intentionally or unintentionally ) God for their own purposes . She recognized how religious symbols too frequently and conveniently correspond to human aspirations , in contrast to the impossible demands of Christ ’ s exemplarity . God and the supernatural are hidden and formless in the universe . It is well that they should be hidden and nameless in the soul . Otherwise there would be a risk of having something imaginary under the name of God ( those who fed and clothed Christ did not know that it was Christ ) . . . . Christianity ( Catholic and Protestant ) speaks too much about holy things.25 Christ , in other words , is fetishized through self-fashioned and self-serving symbolic orders . “ Man always devotes himself to an order . Only , unless there is supernatural illumination , this order has as its center either himself or some particular being or thing . . . with which he has identified himself . . . . It is a perspective order. ” 26 In fact , she attributes this fundamental theological error as the primary cause of all of the crises we listed above . As she writes , “ The errors of our time come from Christianity without the supernatural , ” 27 the absolutizing of the relative or the relativizing of the absolute . Much of what has come under the guise of “ religion ” or “ Christianity ” is only so by name and in appearance . Rather than being authentically oriented away from the self/ego toward God , theological narratives , dogmas , doctrines , and their corresponding rites more often than not are purely self-serving . Even in matters expressly religious , subjectively , the pull of the ego proves far more resilient than the impossible and impersonal nature of God ( truth/reality ) . Thus , Weil observed that the reality of Christ ’ s example is eclipsed by the increasingly opaque symbols and linguistic structures devised , paradoxically , for the purpose of discoursing about and , one supposes , being drawn to God . Somewhat tragically , this confusion plagues the Church . As she writes , “ If one asks several priests whether such-and-such a thing is strictly an article of faith , one obtains different , often dubitative , answers . That creates an impossible situation . . . ” 28 Ultimately , Weil argued , theology necessarily fails at ensuring communion with God . Human language can not capture God . The hermeneutic systems and symbols theologians create become idols—that is , mistaken for God ( or , in a more strict sense , the theologians ’ and their adherents ’ self/ego stands in God ’ s place ) —and religion ( the graven image of the self ) is made into an idol . God is created in man ’ s image29 and not vice versa as the case is otherwise theologically stated to be . “ Idolatry is , ” evoking the Platonic allegory yet again , “ a vital necessity in the cave ” because it inevitably sets “ narrow limits for mind and heart. ” 30 Rather than being transparent symbols that function by allusion , theological symbols are an ersatz of God . The theological God acts like a Rorschach test . The viewer ’ s perception and/or construction of the theological blot on the page , metaphorically speaking , is far more self-disclosive than it is disclosive of the supernatural . Nevertheless , theological authority asserts that its symbolic order is in fact an , or rather , the accurate measure of God . Socially and politically , in fact , it does come to function as such because predictably , Weil contends , its theology appeases the individual and collective ego , giving people firm ideas and concepts they can latch onto and oftentimes use to explain and appease their suffering.31 The collective body of the Church reifies this symbolic order ; that is , the supposed sacrality of the symbols and rites is mistaken as the very object of worship ; appearance is taken as reality , the means are taken as the end . Weil never tired of pointing out that what passes for religiosity is frequently nothing more than hubris . In practice , obedience is given to values derived from the self ( e.g. , greed , pride , etc . ) and the collective ( e.g. , nationalism , capitalism , etc . ) and not those found in the example of Christ ( e.g. , humility , charity , and love ) . In other words , falsehood is the order of the day , and thus is the root of the crises and the outright obliviousness to our own roles in creating them . [ F ] alsehood is an armour by means of which man often enables what is unfit in him to survive events which , were it not for such armour , would destroy it ( thus pride manages to survive humiliations ) , and this armour is as it were secreted by what is unfit in order to ward off danger ( in humiliation , pride makes thicker the inner falsehood which covers it ) . There is as it were a phagocytosis in the soul : everything which is threatened by time secretes falsehood in order not to die , and in proportion to the danger it is in of dying . That is why there is not any love of truth without an unconditional acceptance of death.32 Truth , in the Platonic sense , is transcendent and , therefore , universal and eternal . Philosophy , insofar as it is leading an examined life out of love of truth/wisdom , is the practice for dying and death.33 It requires , in other words , a commitment to let go of false beliefs when they fail to stand up to the scrutiny of the intellect despite appeals to tradition , authority , or even the consequential suffering the self must endure in relinquishing otherwise self-serving positions . This is the meaning of self-sacrifice . Only those ideas and practices that stand up to the impersonal standards of being universally and eternally true should remain . The ego/self is not of this category according to Weil . In her metaphysics the self is a product of creation and thus is susceptible to temporality and mortality—though it disavows itself of this recognition . As Weil observed in the quotation above , those things that are most severely self-centered ( false ) and , hence , fated to die ( e.g. , authoritarianism , totalitarianism , etc . ) resist the inevitable most vehemently—usually by force and violence . The theological implications of this logic were clear to Weil . Returning to the question of baptism , she had to answer honestly what it would mean for her to join the Church ( the collective ) . Would she then be forced to compromise the application of her intellect , for instance , and thus philosophical inquiry ? Would she be an accomplice to the injustices and untruths shrouded by a false sense of religiosity ? Reflecting further upon her frustration from getting inconsistent and even contradictory answers to questions that she posed to a variety of priests , she concludes : “ It does not seem that the Church can be infallible ; for , in fact , it is continually evolving. ” 34 Unless one willingly turns a blind eye toward Church history , it is undeniable that the Church itself has demonstrated the fluctuations characteristic of the world of appearances . Its proclamations at any given point in time are opinions ( doxa ) , not understanding ( noesis ) , in the Platonic usage of those terms . Thus they change . Just as there is an inherent incongruity between man and God , then , there persists an incongruity between the Church and God . Weil argues that this basic distinction is lost in the aura of religiosity that is commonplace among the collective . As far as the Church goes , in fact , she contends that there is a mistaken belief that the Church , as the “ mystical Body ” is God incarnate—not Jesus . “ But , ” she counters , “ there is a slight difference , which is that Christ was perfect , whereas the Church is sullied by a host of crimes. ” 35 The Great Beast In her assessment of the Church , Weil was sympathetic to its susceptibility to corruption . It should not be forgotten , after all , that she was genuinely struggling with her decision to forego baptism . It was not an insincere pretense to critique the Church . So what was it that made the Church as such so vulnerable to distractions away from the divine ? As we have seen above , Weil argues that the root cause of our crises , spiritual or otherwise , is attachment to ego and the striving for self-satisfaction and self-preservation ( immortality ) at the expense of truth and justice . Somewhat paradoxically , we pursue our most egotistic desires , caprices , and delusions of grandeur more zealously within a collective . The collective—wherein a consensus is arrived , which panders to our basest desires , “ the lowest common denominator ” —provides us with a specious claim to legitimacy . There are two goods of the same denomination but radically different from each other : one which is the opposite of evil and the one which is absolute . The absolute has no opposite . The relative is not the opposite of the absolute ; it is derived from it through a relationship which is not commutative . That which we want is the absolute good . That which is within our reach is the good which is correlated to evil . We betake ourselves to it by mistake . . . . It is the social which throws the color of the absolute over the relative . . . . Society is the cave . The way out is solitude.36 The above passage reiterates Weil ’ s framework . Her conceptualization of Christianity is Platonic in the sense that the individual is the site of what we might call an existential schizophrenia : a material existence ( the body ) that is drawn toward the world and a spiritual existence ( the soul ) that , though tethered to the body , is drawn toward truth . What we really want—that is , in the soul—is absolute good ( God ) . However , due to our bodily presence , gravity pulls us to the earth . The earth ’ s horizon is limited by the ego ’ s presence . Left unto herself , however , the individual stands a better chance for seeing her own limits and recognizing her errors . Immersed within the social , she is further deluded in her self-referential logic . For Weil , of course , the only answer to dualism is to surrender the ego pulled by gravity in the service of truth , goodness , justice , and beauty . The call to surrender one ’ s self/ego to God/the Good is predictably met with great resistance . It requires , after all , “ an unconditional acceptance of death. ” 37 Sacrifice . An individual ’ s existence seems more real than God experientially—especially when we factor in Weil ’ s premise that we must love a God who is absent . Common sense dictates that one should and , indeed , only can love that which is present . Who we are—our identities—seem far more real in our lived experience than an invisible , impersonal God . But as we have seen , it is precisely this tension that is at the root of Christianity according to Weil . Following the basic Platonic structure , the fact that relative “ goods ” participate in the absolute Good is more problematic than if we were called upon to distinguish between the latter and an equivalent absolute Evil . Since relative goods imitate the Good they thus appear to be absolutely Good to an inattentive audience . Because the ego/self is not absolute but is itself a derivative of God through creation , attachment to these relative goods appears to have more veracity and is certainly more pragmatic . The collective , or as Weil called it after Plato , the Great Beast,38 seizes upon the selfish inclination born in human nature , exacerbating it by making it seem as if the collective ’ s directives are in the interest of each individual . Although truth is not democratic , to recall Plato ’ s contentions , the Great Beast makes it seem so by manipulating the ego ’ s capacity to deceive itself ( so as not to endure any discomfort ) . Individuals in the collective independently believe that “ I am ‘ good ’ and ‘ just ’ in my present form. ” Life as presently lived goes unexamined . Even when crises are at hand , fault always lies at another ’ s feet , is due to chance , “ destiny , ” or , even , is understood to be part of a larger Perfection . The Great Beast succeeds insofar as it sustains the illusion that it does not contradict each individual ’ s self-interests and that it , in fact , furthers each individual ’ s narrow desires . To the degree that it maintains this appearance , the Great Beast functions as an ersatz divinity idolized by the populace . Here Weil takes recourse in philosophy . But as Plato presciently noted , “ [ T ] he majority can not be philosophic. ” 39 The Great Beast , like the Sophists to whom the ancient Greek philosophers objected , does nothing other than teach ( or preach as the case may be ) “ the convictions that the majority express when they are gathered together. ” The expressed “ truth ” of the collective is at best the least common denominator . Plato continues in Republic : It ’ s as if someone were learning the moods and appetites of a huge , strong beast that he ’ s rearing—how to approach and handle it , when it is most difficult to deal with or most gentle and what makes it so , what sounds it utters in either condition , and what sounds soothe and anger it . Having learned all this through tending the beast over a period of time , he calls this knack wisdom , gathers his information together as if it were a craft , and starts to teach it . In truth , he knows nothing about which of these convictions is fine or shameful , good or bad , just or unjust , but he applies all these names in accordance with how the beast reacts—calling what it enjoys good and what angers it bad . He has no other account to give of these terms.40 Instead of climbing out of the allegorical cave , or in Weil ’ s Christian terms , standing before the impersonal and impossible God , the individual finds solace in the warm embrace of the collective whose message conveniently matches the individual ’ s base tendencies . Moreover , the individual is easily managed—manipulated—by the collective.41 Rather than remaining steadfast in search of truth , goodness , beauty , and justice , “ [ c ] onscience , ” Weil writes , “ is deceived by the social. ” 42 This brings to mind another Socratically inspired Christian philosopher , Søren Kierkegaard , who quipped , “ A crowd is . . . untruth. ” 43 Truth and , by extension for Weil , ethicality—true religiosity—are too often abandoned in favor of the Great Beast . “ The collective is the object of all idolatry . . . ” 44 Selfish individuals happily join organizations and put their full faith in them insofar as they shield them from having to face the reality of who they really are as reflected in the stark contrast between the ego and divine truth . They avoid having to think themselves otherwise than being . Attention is absent ; distracted by the ego/self , all energies are directed at the collective . The framework for openness to the ethical ( truth ) is overcome by the societal revelry of the spectacle ( appearance ) . Anathema sit—Political theology In light of the two previous sections , we now turn more directly to Weil ’ s view of the Church and by extension the political . Her refusal of baptism is grounded in her understanding of the Church as a social entity . “ What frightens me , ” she writes , “ is the Church as a social structure . Not only on account of its blemishes , but from the very fact that it is something social. ” 45 For , as she says elsewhere , “ the social feeling is so much like the religious as to be mistaken for it. ” 46 The experiential similarities between religious experience and the self-satisfied elation felt from immersion in the collective are too subtle to discern except by the most attentive . The confusion of the collective spirit with that of authentic religiosity creates a dangerous , even deadly , situation . Thus , in the same sense Weil was skeptical about the social in general , she was prima facie dubious about an institution that in name and mission is in service of the sacred , but which in fact is a social entity like all others . But with an added twist : A society like the Church which claims to be divine is perhaps more dangerous on account of the ersatz good which it contains than on account of the evil which sullies it . Something of the social labeled divine : an intoxicating mixture which carries with it every sort of license.47 To summarize her logic thus far , then , Weil traced the root of corruption to the ego/self . It is primarily driven by desire ( which by nature is infinite ) for material pleasures ( which by nature are finite ) . The draw toward worldly “ goods ” expands outward , from individual to collective ( where the promise of infinite pleasures is articulated and reified ) . The collective , now the idol , is empowered to pursue its unquenchable thirst for material goods , instantiating an ersatz divinity . [ P ] ower must not seem to be arbitrarily allocated , because it will not then be recognized as power . Therefore prestige , which is illusion , is of the very essence of power . All power is based , in fact , upon the interrelation of human activities ; but in order to be stable it must appear as something absolute and sacrosanct , both to those who wield and those who submit to it and also to other external powers.48 In essence there exists a political-theology , the emphasis being placed on the political as preceding the ersatz religiosity . Interpreting the devil ’ s words to Christ in the Gospel of Matthew , “ All this power will I give thee and the glory of it , for that is delivered unto me and whomsoever I will give it , ” 49 Weil writes , “ It follows from this that the social is irremediably the domain of the devil . The flesh impels us to say me and the devil impels us to say us . . . . And , in conformity with this particular mission , the devil manufactures a false imitation of what is divine , an ersatz divinity. ” 50 There remains , and always will remain , an insoluble tension between the collective religion or its corresponding theologies and what Weil understood to be true religiosity—which is only possible in the site of the individual . Since the Church is by nature social , and the social is inherently “ the domain of the devil ” offering in place of God an ersatz divinity , joining and consequently serving the Church ( as a duty ) would be to abandon conscience and intelligence . Weil did not cease her scrutiny of the Church here as if the only point of her query was for personal reasons . Instead , she extends it into a full-blown critique as one instance among many tragically misguided collectives . As the adage goes , power is intoxicating , especially the type nourished by feelings of social security . Religious—and political—homogeneity is more readily accomplished when the goals and consequences are pleasurable , as opposed to those that might result in suffering , or even demand self-sacrifice ( e.g. , charity ) . Religion as such is merely a populist movement . One need only consider the emphasis placed on the numbers of congregants as a measure of the validity of the message of a particular Christian church or denomination—more so , even , than systematic theology . Furthermore , the increase in contemporary worship services and other such liturgical innovations—not to mention the rapidly increasing number of nondenominational churches geared toward attracting as many worshippers as possible by appealing to pop culture , feel-good theologies , and so on—are all designed to reassure and appease ( following the trend of modern self-help51 ) rather than to challenge Christians in their ways of thinking and acting in the world . Evidently , the sense of belonging has more value than the truth of the message . “ The power of the social element . Agreement between several men brings with it a feeling of reality . It brings with it also a sense of duty . Divergence , where this agreement is concerned , appears as sin. ” 52 The ability to speak truth to power in the style of Jesus is rendered impotent because only the dominant discourses can be heard . “ Truth ” is defined by the majority . Consensus requires compromise.53 But for Weil , Jesus ’ message of love and charity was uncompromising . Once the “ us ” of consensus is established , all that is “ other ” is deemed “ evil , ” 54 anathema . The us is obliged—it has a mission—to exclude those others and defend itself against those who are perceived to be hostile to itself or as possible contagion to its “ pure ” mission while expanding its realm of influence as much as possible . The larger the collective , the more power and authority it harnesses . It should be readily apparent at this point that the collective turns Christianity as Weil understood it on its head . She argued that the Church , to put it simply , gets it wrong . “ Christianity is catholic by right but not in fact. ” 55 As a case in point , proving to Weil the sheer power of the Great Beast to corrupt even the most spiritually devout , she cites those Catholic saints who seemed to her to relinquish their commitment to Christ ’ s epistemic-ethical calling and endorsed the infliction of violence upon others . There were some saints who approved of the Crusades or the Inquisition . I can not help thinking that they were in the wrong . I can not go against the light of conscience . . . [ T ] hey were blinded by something very powerful . This something was the Church seen as a social structure.56 The Church , with all of its systematic theology , symbols , and sacred rites , failed to prevent the weakening of the saints ’ consciences because as a social construct it is yet another manifestation of the Great Beast embellished by the appearance of having religious authority . Although up to this point we have been analyzing the spiritual crisis as a result of the social dimension of organized religion , we ought not forget that this line of thinking was simultaneously applicable to the growing social-political crisis that preoccupied Weil as the tide of Hitlerism loomed ominously over all of Europe.57 These were not unrelated phenomena to Weil ’ s mind . Indeed , the slope bridging these two spheres is so slippery as to be a foregone conclusion that the two would elide into an unholy alliance with devastating consequences . The spiritual crisis and the social- political crises plaguing modern society were directly related . In Weil ’ s assessment , the Church , after Rome , was a prototype of the political-theology to come . After the fall of the Roman Empire , which had been totalitarian , it was the Church that was the first to establish a rough sort of totalitarianism in Europe in the thirteenth century . . . . And the motive power of this totalitarianism was the use of those two little words : anathema sit.58 As E. Jane Doering comments , The pope ’ s thirteenth-century support of the Inquisition and the genocidal crusade against the Albigensians had nurtured the growth of totalitarianism already present in the institution of the Church . In Weil ’ s opinion , the formula for excommunication , Anathema sit , which denied any possibility of truth and its incarnation outside the Church , was proof of the Church ’ s excessive authority . Over the many centuries , the Catholic hierarchy had supported the Inquisitions ’ methods of using fear and physical torture to ferret out heresies against Christianity . The Albigensian or Cathar Crusade ( 1209–29 ) , sanctioned by the Church , had employed extreme violence , even by medieval standards , against the Cathars of Languedoc , accused by the Roman Catholic hierarchy of having abandoned their religious faith . The annihilation of the Cathar civilization of Oc in southern France provoked a poignant sorrow in Weil , for she felt that the Albigenses had formed a rare society inspired by true love of neighbor.59 As a social construct , the Church can not tolerate too much diversity . It demands orthodoxy—homogeneity . Heterodoxies and heresies are by definition impermissible . The logic of excommunication , Weil contended , contradicts Jesus ’ radical wisdom to love one ’ s neighbors and enemies alike . Unfortunately , as we have seen , identitarian logic is more forceful in the wider populace . For example , consider the fanaticism of sports enthusiasts ’ unconditional loyalty to a team , or the zeal of affiliates within a secular political party or nation-state . These are only a few examples of the ersatz religiosity that Weil feared would too readily lend itself to the purely political . Hitler ’ s nationalism fabricated a religious aura around itself—a simulacrum of religious experience . The love of self was transmuted into the love of the social ( the Great Beast ) , which was further reified and transmuted into the love of country or nationalism.60 And Hitlerism too , tragically , decided that entire groups of people were anathema ( “ them ” ) to its social-political vision ( “ us ” ) and sought to systematically eliminate them from the face of the earth.61 For Weil , the true Christian orientation would necessarily refute such claims and would in fact move in the opposite direction toward nonidentitarianism or , even , anti-identitariansim . This universalism is the true meaning of catholicism . Identity is necessarily ego-centered and , therefore , un-catholic . Identifying with any collective—whether a religion , nation , economic philosophy , et cetera—is tantamount to self-love writ large and is essentially idolatrous in that it demands uncompromising , unconditional allegiance to said identity . Patriotism ( when indistinct from nationalism ) 62 is the most pernicious social identity . Thus , Weil writes , “ We must not have any love other than charity [ which is necessarily selfless ] . A nation can not be an object of charity. ” 63 Nevertheless , in an especially candid moment in a letter she wrote to Father Perrin , she confesses , I am aware of very strong gregarious tendencies in myself . My natural disposition is to be very easily influenced , too influenced , and above all by anything collective . I know that if at this moment I had before me a group of twenty young Germans singing Nazi songs in chorus , a part of my soul would instantly become Nazi.64 Lost in the mass hysteria created by amphibolous words and symbols—which Weil called “ words with capital letters ” 65—and the faux religious experience in group-belonging , is sincere care for truth , justice , goodness , and beauty . Terms like “ Democracy , ” “ Communism , ” “ Freedom , ” and “ Terrorism , ” and even words such as “ Christianity ” as publicly conceived , lack clear definition . Nevertheless , countless human beings have killed or have been killed in service to them . “ If we grasp one of these words , ” she writes , “ all swollen with blood and tears , and squeeze it , we find it is empty . . . . [ W ] hen empty words are given capital letters , then , on the slightest pretext , we will begin shedding blood for them and piling up ruin in their name , without effectively grasping anything to which they refer , for the simple reason that they mean nothing. ” 66 The capitalization of such terms is for effect only . That is to say , the words are given an inflated sense of significance—in the double sense of the term—by mere affectation . It is not that the words actually do signify something real and are therefore capitalized such that men are willing to act violently on their behalf , but they merely will them to have more meaning than they actually do or resist defining them so as to avoid the limits a definition would impose . Weil ’ s radical remedy is philosophic : [ W ] hen a word is properly defined it loses its capital letter and can no longer serve either as a banner or a hostile slogan ; it simply becomes a sign , helping us to grasp some concrete reality or concrete objective , or method of activity . To clarify thought , to discredit the intrinsically meaningless words , and to define the use of others by precise analysis—to do this , strange though it may appear , might be a way of saving human lives.67 This holds equally true for “ Hitlerism ” as it does for “ Christianity. ” Another philosopher who was concerned with , studied , and analyzed totalitarianism , Hannah Arendt , through a very different route , came to conclusions that are complementary to Weil ’ s diagnoses . Writing after World War II , Arendt observed , “ Where all are guilty , no one is ; confessions of collective guilt are the best possible safeguard against the discovery of culprits , and the very magnitude of the crime the best excuse for doing nothing. ” 68 In other words , among the anonymity of the collective , the individual escapes all sense of culpability—privately and publicly—whether s/he directly participated in mass crimes against humanity or remained hidden in the shadows . Weil would fully agree with Arendt ’ s point here . And she would reiterate her explanation that the root causes are the ego ’ s unwillingness to suffer , even for the sake of truth and justice , in combination with the allure of the collective prestige that corrupts conscience . All of this is packaged and sold—reified and idolized—in words with capital letters . Weil offers two seemingly contradictory methods for reorienting ourselves to respond properly to these crises : atheism and mysticism . Atheism as purification “ We must , ” Weil insists , “ prefer real hell to an imaginary paradise. ” 69 Properly understood , religion ought never to be a form of escapism . Theologies that emphasize teleological , messianic , paradisiacal , or apocalyptic visions misguide our orientation toward the world . True religion is not a guaranteed source of solace , for Weil , for properly speaking religion is not a tool for us . Primarily it functions in quite an opposite manner . The incongruity between the world as is and the hierophany ( the world as it ought to be ) is a constant source of anguish . Hence , for Weil , “ Religion in so far as it is a source of consolation is a hindrance to true faith . . . ” She continues , “ [ I ] n this sense atheism is a purification . I have to be atheistic with the part of myself which is not made for God . Among those men in whom the supernatural part has not been awakened , the atheists are right and the believers wrong. ” 70 As we have seen above , collective representations of divinity are in essence idolatrous . It follows that the necessary first step is to bracket inherited presuppositions about God . It would become wildly confusing to maintain fidelity to a theological system and try to root out only the mistaken bits , as it were . In a fashion reminiscent of Descartes ’ method of doubt , Weil suggests that atheism “ is a purification of the notion of God. ” 71 In other words , apologist philosophers of religion and theologians alike are necessarily confined by preexisting frameworks for understanding and representing God . Their efforts at best amount to word games because the words they have either inherited or created themselves in response to the preexisting narratives are always distanced from actual divinity as well as the world itself . Atheism affords a clean break from this circular reasoning . One might object that atheism necessarily closes off the possibility of a transcendent reality such as one finds in religious traditions like Christianity , or even philosophical systems such as Platonism . But Weil was merely suggesting that atheism clears the ground for the possibility of being truly open to the experience of what appears to transcend “ natural ” encounters in contradistinction to merely thinking about , conceptualizing , and intellectually capturing “ God. ” Thus in this fashion Weil has more in common with contemporary phenomenologists such as Jean-Luc Marion72 and Anthony Steinbock73 than she does with atheist philosophers seeking to refute the existence of God . In its most basic form , she saw atheism as a means to root out all of the implicit problems within traditional theological frameworks and philosophies of religion . She did not intend by this statement to imply that atheists are in possession of certain knowledge as such , especially with respect to the existence or nonexistence of God . If the latter is held , it replicates the error of traditional theologies—it lacks epistemological humility and openness—and , therefore , is another form of idolatry ( e.g. , as is found in capitalism , scientism , et cetera ) . Simply put , then , Weil reckoned that insofar as atheism is not bewildered by the trappings of theology and religious philosophy , or socially constructed visions of God , it is preferable and even an advisable starting point . Previously we described her stance as a reflective negative theology , or atheology . These terms convey the sort of renunciation at the base of a purified religious stance that is void of affirmations about the divine but where “ religiosity ” can be observed only in individuals ’ orientations to the world . Collectively bargained theologies in particular are a threat because , as we have seen already , once formulated and reified , they are no longer completely open to intellectual inquiry . There is to be no questioning of what are taken to be fundamental theological truths such as the existence of God . It is straightforward dogmatism . Weil counters by writing , In so far as ‘ God exists ’ is an intellectual proposition—but only to that extent—it can be denied without committing any sin at all either against charity or against faith . ( And , indeed , such a negation , formulated on a provisional basis , is a necessary stage in philosophical investigation . ) Christianity has , in fact , since the very beginning , or nearly so , suffered from an intellectual malaise . This malaise is due to the way in which the Church has conceived its power of jurisdiction and especially the use of the formula anathema sit . Wherever there is an intellectual malaise , we find the individual is oppressed by the social factor , which tends to become totalitarian.74 The confluence of the political and the theological , then , is causa sui anti-philosophical . The enforcement of homogeneity , theologically and socially , is prohibitive of philosophical investigation . Weil , to the contrary , was fully committed to the spirit of philosophy . Complete liberty within its own sphere is essential to the intelligence . The intelligence must either exercise itself with complete liberty , or else keep silent . Within the sphere of the intelligence , the Church has no right of jurisdiction whatsoever ; consequently , and more particularly , all “ definitions ” where it is a question of proofs are unlawful ones.75 With respect to classical issues raised in theology and philosophy of religion—especially about the existence of God , God ’ s nature , the problem of evil , God ’ s relationship to the world and humans , et cetera—Weil ’ s approach is a form of negative theology that begins with her experience in the world . Consequently , it is never a question of proving or affirming God ’ s existence . Rather , she writes , I saw the problem of God as a problem of the data of which could not be obtained here below , and I decided . . . to leave it alone . . . . I neither affirmed nor denied anything . It seemed to me useless to solve the problem , for I thought that , being in this world , our business was to adopt the best attitude with regard to the problems of this world . . .76 The last line of this passage seems to indicate that Weil ’ s method—if it does not completely close us off from a transcendent God—leaves us suspended in the immanent world . And this is true to a certain extent , since , as we shall see in later chapters , grace is supernatural and , thus , is not in our power . At this time , however , the important distinction to be made is that Weil ’ s appeal to atheism as a form of purification shifts the question of whether or not God exists to how we should attend to the world—or , how we should experience . A clue to this answer is found yet again in Plato who , after Weil ’ s own mystical encounters , she came “ to feel . . . was a mystic. ” 77 Weil understood philosophy—and by extension true religiosity or mysticism—as the practice of dying . “ This is why in the ancient mysteries , in Platonic philosophy , in Sanskrit texts , in the Christian religion , and probably everywhere and always , detachment has ever been compared to death , and the initiation to wisdom regarded as a kind of passage through death . This idea is found in the most ancient texts we possess concerning human thought . . . and it is as ancient as is humanity itself . So every search for wisdom is oriented toward death. ” 78 According to her , the only means of resistance to the base inclination to idolatry is that highest capacity of detachment that “ we do not [ naturally ] possess , ” that is , “ the power of supernatural attention , ” which furthermore , “ we have not the patience to allow . . . to develop. ” 79 Insofar as we are naturally inattentive , then , what hope is there for emerging from the social , political , and religious caves in which we normally reside ? Mysticism The first stage of the art of dying—mysticism—is renouncing collective identities . Until the very end of her life—depending on whether one believes that Simone Deitz baptized her or not80—Weil resisted baptism primarily on the bases outlined above . She definitively declared : “ There is a Catholic circle ready to give an eager welcome to whoever enters it . Well , I do not want to be adopted into a circle , to live among people who say ‘ we ’ and to be part of an ‘ us , ’ to find I am ‘ at home ’ in any human milieu whatever it may be. ” 81 Liberation from the collective requires intellectual independence . Although Weil did not advocate monasticism as such—which certainly played an important part in the historical development of Christian mysticism82—it was in moments of quiet solitude that she eventually had experiences that she later came to identify as mystical encounters . Weil noted that “ almost since the beginning , the individual has been ill at ease in Christianity. ” 83 There is , in other words , an inherent tension between the individual and the collective in religion which is identifiable in the varying manners Christ spoke depending on whether he was “ speaking before an assembly such as a council , ” or with a “ well-beloved friend. ” 84 The “ language of the marketplace , ” 85 as Weil called collective language , lends itself to the phenomena described above : the Great Beast and idolatry . The faculty of the intellect with its inherited linguistic frameworks deals squarely with these problems , but then it too must be abandoned in favor of the possibility of actual encounters and the language of intimacy . Thinking about always requires a distancing—perspective is gained from a distance between the thinker and the object of inquiry . Love , on the contrary , is the experience of wanting to close the gap between the subject and the object , but it is simultaneously a sign of that distance , too . Intellectualizing is not loving . And theorizing about loving is a further perversion of the orientation that Weil understood Jesus to have embodied . Thus , Weil says that only the “ language of the nuptial chamber ” 86 can be used with respect to the “ word of God , ” which “ is the secret word. ” 87 At stake in this discussion of language , then , are the registers of intimacy . How do we experience phenomena other than how they are normally construed within our existing linguistic and logical structures ? Our self-created communicative tools preclude the most intimate encounters with others or with God by rejecting a priori certain modes of evidence gathering or simply by forcing such experiences into collectively determined generalizations—the language of the marketplace . Anthony Steinbock notes the prevailing prejudice against a plurality of modes of such intimate experiencing thusly : The prejudice is this : All matters , especially those that concern the Holy , have to conform to one type of givenness in order to be given and hence to be experienced . If they do not conform , they are said to remain essentially on the limit of experience and are subject only to theory , speculation , or mere personal belief.88 If an experience is not immediately identifiable through a preexisting linguistic or logical construct , then it automatically is reduced to pure subjectivity or abstract speculation . In other words , static categories and stabilizing concepts render only specified experiences as “ intelligible , ” meaningful , and even real . These constrictions apply as much for secular frameworks as they do for theological ones such as the political-theology of the Church discussed previously.89 “ Sensitivity to vertical givenness is not accomplished by constructing a metaphysics or by applying either theological convictions or ethical belief systems to the experiences , ” argues Steinbock , “ but by . . . evaluating what is actually given in human experience , thereby expanding our notion of evidence. ” 90 True disinterestedness , paradoxically , requires a radical sensitivity and openness . The self is dis-posed of in order that the experiencer is open “ to being struck in which ever way the given gives itself. ” 91 Hence the importance of Weil ’ s statement that she “ never at any moment in [ her ] life . . . ‘ sought for God. ’ ” 92 To go looking for God would entail a purposeful search . This interested approach is suspect for producing the results one intends , or seeing what one wants to see , and thus all resulting evidential claims are dismissed as prejudicial . One of Steinbock ’ s contentions , which aligns with Weil ’ s own , is that the adherence to preexisting modes of knowing is itself such a ( self- ) interested project . Equally important along these lines , before providing an account of Weil ’ s mystical experiences , is her sense of relief due to the fact that she had not read other mystical writings before she had her own mystical experiences , “ so that it should be evident to me that I had not invented this absolutely unexpected contact. ” 93 Weil ’ s mysticism was the result of intellectual honesty and constant philosophical analysis and critique , that is , not a flimsy , shoddily constructed , self-interested spirituality intentionally wrapped in vague language . At the same time , she understood that genuine philosophical reflection is problematized by assumed linguistic frameworks . She wrote , for instance , “ Language is not made for expressing philosophical reflection. ” 94 Her constant self-critique had the effect of decentering her “ self. ” 95 As such , she was vulnerable to being struck by un ( pre ) determined experiences , whether of the ordinary ( e.g. , human pain and suffering ) or extraordinary ( e.g. , religious ) variety . Many of these experiences were , in fact , decidedly not in her self-interest.96 From April to August 1934 , Weil endured her first stint working in the dehumanizing conditions of factories . Although her family had the financial means to support her , or at the very least to take good care of her during off hours with proper food , clothing , and other daily necessities , Weil insisted that she live exactly as her coworkers who were forced to subsist on the meager wages they earned . Consequently , she often went hungry , and her general appearance was unkempt . In the end , she described herself as being “ in pieces , soul and body . . . . That contact with affliction had killed my youth . . . . As I worked . . . the affliction of others entered into my flesh and my soul. ” 97 The effects of the unbearable working and living conditions—which so many of the world ’ s population have no choice but to endure—were exacerbated by the fact that Weil suffered from severe migraine headaches her entire life . Emotionally exhausted and in wretched physical condition , she said that the experience turned her into a “ slave. ” Later in 1934 , Weil traveled with her parents to a small fishing village in Portugal . During a celebration of the town ’ s patron saint , Weil witnessed a procession of women “ making a tour of all the ships , carrying candles and singing what must have been very ancient hymns of a heart-rending sadness. ” 98 The experience was beyond words . Suddenly , she writes , “ the conviction was borne in upon me that Christianity is pre-eminently the religion of slaves , that slaves can not help belonging to it , and I among others. ” 99 This was the first of her three mystical experiences . The second came in 1937 in Assisi in the chapel of Santa Maria degli Angeli , “ where St. Francis often used to pray. ” 100 There she describes an event in which “ something stronger than [ her ] . . . compelled [ her ] for the first time in [ her ] life to go down on [ her ] knees. ” 101 Her first prostration of prayer , then , was not a supplication stirred by selfish desire , nor the fulfillment of ritual obligation as deemed by religious authority , but was a response to her sense of a supernatural love . The last of her reported mystical experiences occurred when she was reciting George Herbert ’ s poem , “ Love. ” In 1938 she attended the Easter celebration at the Benedictine Abbey Solesmes . Suffering from migraines as she frequently did , she sat in the cathedral where the monks were singing Gregorian chants . In their chanting she found “ a pure and perfect joy , ” 102 which provided her relief from the distracting headaches and offered her a glimpse of “ the possibility of loving divine love in the midst of affliction. ” 103 On the recommendation of an English Catholic she met at Solesmes , she read , memorized , and regularly recited Herbert ’ s poem , often “ at the culminating point of a violent headache . . . . It was during one of these recitations that . . . Christ himself came down and took possession of [ her ] . ” 104 This final mystical experience is the culmination—not the contradiction—of all of Weil ’ s philosophical thinking . Mysticism is not the opposite of philosophy , but the consequence of philosophical investigation . As it is commonly bound by language , philosophy is limited , but it can bring us to a state wherein we are more open to those experiences and truths that surpass what has been produced as “ intelligible. ” “ In my arguments about the insolubility of the problem of God , ” she reflects , “ I had never foreseen the possibility of that , of a real contact , person to person , here below , between human being and God. ” 105 For all of their logical literacy , nobody has accused philosophers of being too loving or philosophy for promoting loving and intimate encounters with others . The commonplace idea is that love is the province of poetry—not philosophy ( despite philosophy ’ s literal meaning , “ love of wisdom ” ) . Philosophy has been assumed , especially recently , illiterate in love ’ s expression , possibly because the role of philosophy has been narrowly defined as “ construct [ ing ] systems to eliminate contradictions. ” 106 However , Weil ’ s own life is a testament to the fact that there can be no divorce between genuine philosophical rigor and the kind of vulnerable and attentive sensitivity to the world that draws love and with it , divine inspiration . We should not forget Plato ’ s contention that philosophy , like poetic inspiration , is a kind of madness : “ [ the philosopher ] stands outside human concerns and draws close to the divine : ordinary people think he is disturbed and rebuke him for this , unaware that he is possessed by god. ” 107 In her own encounter with the supernatural , however , Weil “ only felt in the midst of [ her ] suffering the presence of a love , like that which one can read in the smile on a beloved face. ” 108 After this final mystical experience , Weil never again “ wondered whether Jesus was or was not the Incarnation of God ; but in fact [ she ] was incapable of thinking of him without thinking of him as God. ” 109 Jesus as the incarnation of truth , as we will see in the next chapter , is of central importance to Weil ’ s thought . 2Christology and religious pluralism “ Let us do evil that good may come ? ” Their condemnation is deserved ! ROMANS 3:8 Extended , the lines of relationships intersect in the eternal You . MARTIN BUBER1 Letter to a priest In 1942 while living with her family in exile in New York , at the urging of the Catholic philosopher Jacques Maritain , Weil wrote a letter to the Dominican priest Marie-Alain Couturier ( 1897–1954 ) . This letter contains her most explicit and complete set of philosophical-theological questions , systematically presented for his consideration in 35 discrete sections . She opens the letter by saying , When I read the catechism of the Council of Trent , it seems as though I had nothing in common with the religion there set forth . When I read the New Testament , the mystics , the liturgy , when I watch the celebration of the mass , I feel with a sort of conviction that this faith is mine or , to be more precise , would be mine without the distance placed between it and me by my imperfection . This results in a painful spiritual state . I would like to make it , not less painful , only clearer . Any pain whatsoever is acceptable where there is clarity.2 Thus , she continues by requesting from him unequivocal answers to her concerns : I am going to enumerate for you a certain number of thoughts which have dwelt in me for years ( some of them at least ) and which form a barrier between me and the Church . I do not ask you to discuss their basis . I should be happy for there to be such a discussion , but later on , in the second place . I ask for you to give me a definite answer—leaving out such expressions as ‘ I think that , ’ etc.—regarding the compatibility or incompatibility of each of these opinions with membership of the Church . If there is incompatibility , I should like you to say straight out : I would refuse baptism ( or absolution ) to anybody claiming to hold the opinions expressed under such headings numbered so-and-so . I do not ask for a quick answer . There is no hurry . All I ask for is a categorical answer.3 We have already dealt with the question of Weil ’ s internal struggle over baptism , and although it is on this very pretense that she wrote this letter to Father Couturier , what is of significance in this letter for our purposes is that it contains many of Weil ’ s near final thoughts about theological issues before her untimely death . In particular , the questions she poses to the Dominican friar express her ideas about the centrality of Christ ( especially the incarnation and his crucifixion ) as well as the issue that has come to be known as religious pluralism . Weil ’ s Christology and her religious pluralism will be analyzed at length in this chapter . An honest engagement with these subjects , however , also necessitates addressing Weil ’ s estranged relationship with her family ’ s ethnic Jewish identity , and , more importantly , her controversial statements condemning the Jewish faith . Many have praised Weil ’ s inclusive stance with respect to non-Christian religious traditions while excluding ( or , at least minimizing ) the evidence of her animosity toward Judaism ( and additionally Islam , as we shall see ) . Just as many critics , it must be admitted , have cited her vitriolic critique of Judaism as sufficient justification for dismissing her entire oeuvre and all of her contributions to religious philosophy and social activism without even considering the arguments underpinning her denouncements . We aim to avoid both of these errors in this chapter and instead take this occasion to discuss directly and extensively the complex and controversial theological-philosophical-ethical questions raised by Weil ’ s treatment of these subject matters—many of which are still of central importance in contemporary theological , political , and ethical debates . Christology Weil ’ s philosophy is unapologetically a Christian philosophy . This means , of course , that her entire worldview is shaped by her understanding of the figure of Jesus , who she most commonly refers to as Christ , and emphasizes his role as a mediator between the divine and the human . But unlike some other Christologies , Weil ’ s analysis of Jesus ’ words and deeds does not single out his resurrection as proof of his divinity and establishment of the Christian mission . Instead , Weil argues that it is Christ ’ s suffering on the cross that is exemplary . As we will explain , Weil ’ s Christology—and therefore her metaphysics and ethics—stands in contrast to other interpretations of Jesus that spread the good news of his triumphant holiness as witnessed through the resurrection and advise Christians , in Panglossian fashion , to rest assured . In her letter to Father Couturier Weil writes , “ And if the Gospel omitted all mention of Christ ’ s resurrection , faith would be easier for me . The Cross by itself suffices me. ” 4 Theologies focusing on the event of the resurrection , to her mind , miss the mark . At the very least , they privilege a certain temporal hierarchy ; that is , these theologies tend to be forward looking—eschatological—instead of attentive to the present . Consequently , the present ( what is ) is framed entirely by an imagined future ( what may/will come ) . But the “ future , ” she exclaims , “ is a filler of void places . . . . [ T ] he future hinder [ s ] the wholesome effect of affliction by providing an unlimited field for imaginary elevation. ” 5 To put it differently , all futural orientations are the products of and only serve to affirm the imagination and pertain little , if at all , to objective reality . Weil insisted that truth is bound with necessity . Psychologically and intellectually , and thereby ethically , dwelling upon the ( unlimited ) future is detrimental to the present in all of its particularities , which are necessarily limited . In situations that present themselves as painful because there is a sense of disequilibrium , injustice , or resistance to our selfish desires , rather than facing the facts , the imagination turns toward the indefinite and pliable future . This maneuver frees the imagination from necessity in order that it might construct a sense of equilibrium . Because the lever can be extended to whatever length the imagination desires , it can “ balance ” out even the most horrific and anguishing present conditions . For example , faced with terminal illness , one can readily imagine a “ purpose ” or providential reason for having been afflicted thusly , or a happy ending in some eternal paradise , thereby relieving oneself from the burden of carrying the full weight of the reality of the situation . The indefinite future diminishes and , therefore , distorts our perception of the present reality . Furthermore , theological beliefs and practices framed thusly have the additional effect of reducing the present ( including persons ) to mere means serving an ulterior , later end . Therefore , Weil contends , the futural gaze of the unbound imagination always misrepresents reality and poses grave ethical consequences . Freely imagining in this way amounts to placing oneself on par with God . Rather than acknowledging and accepting the truth of creation as it is/has been given , one imaginatively “ creates ” ( i.e. , fictionalizes ) the world in a manner she prefers it to be/have been given . “ It is much easier to imagine ourselves in the place of God the creator , ” writes Weil , “ than in the place of Christ crucified. ” 6 Hence , humans are naturally inclined to construct theologies that express how the world would be if the author ( s ) were God rather than theologies that are disinterested accounts of reality . ( As we explained in the previous chapter , the Christ of popular theology is an ersatz divinity—a creation of humankind rather than a response to the present reality of creation itself . ) Returning to a familiar motif , Weil likens imaginative and therefore futural thinking to projecting and predicting shadows on the wall of Plato ’ s allegorical cave . She then concludes , “ To come out of the cave , to be detached , means to cease to make the future our objective. ” 7 By remaining fully present , or “ innocent ” in her words , we relinquish all expectations or claims to equilibrium . “ To be innocent is to bear the weight of the entire universe . It is to throw away the counterweight. ” 8 For Weil , the event of the crucifixion awakens us to the present . The literal suffering and eventual death of Christ ought to evoke compassion ( a suffering with Christ on the cross ) , and in no way should it be diluted , falsified , misrepresented , or erased by the imagination . The crucifixion stands as an impregnable testament to the reality of an order that is not man-made but is the result of God ’ s withdrawal from the world and Jesus ’ perfect response to the necessarily asymmetrical relation between the creator and the created.9 The crucifix represents the tension within creation . Truth is laid bare on the cross . “ The Passion is the existence of perfect justice without any admixture of appearance. ” 10 A Christology inferred from the resurrection as proof of Christ ’ s divinity would logically stress hope in the ultimate victory of goodness over injustice in the same miraculous manner in which Christ defeated death . The result of Weil ’ s Christology , however , is her designation of Christianity as the religion of slaves , not of victors and therefore masters . She stands the theological paradigm intuited in popular imagination on its head . Christ healing the sick , raising the dead , etc.—that is the humble , human , almost low part of the mission . The supernatural part is the sweat of blood , the unsatisfied longing for human consolation , the supplication that he might be spared , the sense of being abandoned by God.11 For Weil , then , to be Christian is not to believe in the God of miracles , is no guarantee that all prayers will be answered , and it is not to be on the winning team , especially one that is rigged so that the outcome always falls in the Christian ’ s favor . The supernatural truth of Christ is evident in his affliction—the paradoxical intersection between the two furthest points : horizontally oriented humankind on one hand , and God ’ s verticality on the other . Christ ’ s suffering and humiliation on the cross is not merely the reconciliation between God and humanity redeeming original sin , according to Weil ; rather , it is Christ ’ s loving consent to the distance between God and his creation . The cross , therefore , serves as the ultimate theological ( and ethical ) symbol in that it provides the true measure of the disequilibrium between God and humanity . “ The cross is infinitely more than martyrdom . It is the most purely bitter suffering—penal suffering . This is the guarantee of its authenticity. ” 12 Jesus ’ anguish was real and therefore should not be curtailed theologically by interpreting it as having been predestined or as a means for a greater , more purposeful end . To the contrary , its reality renders all human expectations and claims to anything more than what has been given illegitimate , hubristic , and idolatrous . God abandoned Jesus on the cross . Hence , Christ ’ s plea , “ My God , my God , why has thou forsaken me ? ” is understood by Weil to be “ the real proof that Christianity is something divine. ” 13 That Jesus was not granted reprieve on the cross and remained there suffering unto death is , unexpectedly , proof of God ’ s love , to Weil . “ The abandonment at the supreme moment of the crucifixion , what an abyss of love on both sides ! ” 14 During this event neither God nor Jesus filled the void . Intellectual honesty and fidelity to the cross , then , prohibits the construction of compensatory theologies.15 In his teachings , Jesus emphasized his Father ’ s love and compassion . He described it as unconditional love—the greatest form of love . “ So that the love may be as great as possible , ” writes Weil , “ the distance is as great as possible. ” 16 God created this abyss through his withdrawal in creation , and this gulf is inscribed in the event of the crucifixion , symbolizing God ’ s refusal to command everywhere he has the power to do so . God wears himself out through the infinite thickness of time and space in order to reach the soul and to captivate it . If it allows a pure and utter consent ( though brief as a lightning flash ) to be torn from it , then God conquers the soul . And when it has become entirely his he abandons it . He leaves it completely alone and it has in its turn , but gropingly , to cross the infinite thickness of time and space in search of him whom it loves . It is thus that the soul , starting from the opposite end , makes the same journey that God made towards it . And that is the cross.17 The possibility of expressing infinite love requires there to exist an infinite gulf between the lover and the beloved . God ’ s act of unconditional love is evident in his refusal to intervene and console his son crying out in agony , thereby sustaining the very possibility of Jesus ’ willing consent . ( We will also see , in the next chapter , how God ’ s love also manifests as creation itself . ) Christ , for his part , loved his Father despite his incarnation and the wretched conditions of his death . Weil ’ s argument follows that the love Jesus exhibited—in both word and deed , but especially on the cross—was infinite and unconditional like his Father ’ s . As such , he is the Mediator , and therefore , exemplary . Weil takes this point quite literally . In her religious philosophy , Christ is not an inimitable deity , but a model for human religious/ethical behavior . She is highly critical of theologies that give lip service to Christ , but never genuinely advise being Christ-like . “ In order that the imitation of God should not be a mere matter of words , it is necessary that there should be a just man to imitate . . . ” 18 Christ crucified , in other words , amounts to an ethical imperative . Jesus mirrored God ’ s love ; Christians are commanded to love just as Jesus loved in the void . “ I have to be like God , but like God crucified . Like God almighty in so far as he is bound by necessity , ” she writes.19 In Christ on the cross , Weil sees the incarnation of the perfect love—loving in God ’ s absence/abandonment and with acceptance of necessity—in proportion to the love received from God.20 Christ is mediator and therefore calls to our attention humanity ’ s true relation with God . This is why she writes , “ The function of mediation in itself implies a tearing asunder. ” 21 In other words , the crucifixion serves to tear us from our attachments to selfish thinking and self-oriented action . The natural attitude is devoid of , or at least forgetful of , vertical relationality . Weil finds evidence of theological perversions of this essential point even in translations of sacred scriptures : The very fact that Logos has been translated by verbum shows that something has been lost , for λόγος means above all relation , and is a synonym for άριθμός , number , with Plato and the Pythagoreans . Relation , that is to say proportion . Proportion , that is to say harmony . Harmony , that is to say mediation . I would translate as follows : In the beginning was Mediation.22 Errant proportions distort the proper relationship between humankind and God . Whereas Jesus embodied the zero-point—egolessness resulting from emptying the void through love—such that God literally became flesh ( incarnation ) , in Weil ’ s understanding , humanity continues to tilt the scales toward individual and collective desires , seeking to be omnipotent and ever-expansive . For Weil , however , Christ ’ s death on the cross is a calling for all humanity to respond in kind . Looking at the symbol of the crucifix ought to recall the one time in Christian history where there was actual equilibrium and recognize fully what it entailed . Intimations of religious pluralism As the title of this section suggests , we will be arguing that the religious pluralism often favorably attributed to Weil is , properly speaking , at best a qualified one . Whereas she does demonstrate a great deal of openness to and even reverence for other religious traditions—going so far as to suggest that Christianity does not hold the sole claim to truth and , in fact , has much wisdom to learn from non-Christian religions—there are two principal concerns that significantly diminish , if not outrightly disqualify any claims of religious inclusiveness in her philosophy : first , Weil ultimately interprets and values non-Christian religious traditions in purely Christian terms ( especially incarnationism ) , and , second , Weil ’ s religious pluralism is contested by her categorical exclusion of Judaism and Islam . A recurrent concern throughout her letter to Father Couturier is the Church ’ s position on and relationship with non-Christian religious traditions . In particular , Weil finds a great deal of value in her studies of other religious traditions and sacred literatures , and she is concerned that showing any sympathy toward these traditions would be grounds for exclusion from the Church . ( Recall her criticisms of anathema sit outlined in the previous chapter . ) Repeatedly , she insists that Father Couturier answer directly whether or not someone who found truth in these other religions would be admitted into the Church and be able to partake in the holy sacraments . Weil has many good reasons to be suspicious of the Church ’ s position with respect to non-Christian religions . The most obvious reason of all was the fact that Christian missionaries had been and continued to be the handmaidens of empire , if not its principal architects.23 Colonial expansion was aided and abetted by Christians desiring to convert native populations , and thus , it was often the case that missionaries were the first to arrive in the so-called new territories . As Weil makes clear , however , “ Missionary zeal has not Christianized Africa , Asia and Oceania , ” rather it “ has brought these territories under the cold , cruel and destructive domination of the white race , which has trodden down everything. ” She continues , It would be strange , indeed , that the word of Christ should have produced such results if it had been properly understood . Christ said : “ Go ye , and teach all nations and baptize those who believe , ” that is to say , those who believe in Him . He never said : “ Compel them to renounce all that their ancestors have looked upon as sacred , and to adopt as a holy book the history of a small nation unknown to them. ” 24 As we discussed in the previous chapter , in Weil ’ s analysis political-theology is the contradictory admixture of the collective will ( the Great Beast ) and Christ ’ s exemplarity , which always results in significantly contorting the latter ( the religious ) for the sake of the former ( the social-political ) . It is predicated on a mistaken interpretation of Jesus ’ mission ; that is , he did not exhibit or mandate to his followers an imperialist imperative to homogenize—by coercion and domination—all humanity under a single theological order . Ultimately , Weil thinks that Jesus “ commanded his apostles to bring glad tidings , not a theology . . . But the command was misunderstood. ” 25 He commanded , in her view , that Christians accept their neighbors and enemies without expectations or reducing them to the same . In fact , in most cases , as we will explain in further detail below , she thinks that changing religions is harmful . The Church perverts Christ ’ s teachings when it condones , is complicit with , and actively participates in deception , exploitation , and the brutal use of force in colonialist expansion . These historical facts were a grave source of consternation for Weil , both as a French citizen and as someone who earnestly tried to model her behavior on Christ ’ s exemplarity . But . . . as to whether a Hindu , a Buddhist , a Muslim , or one of those termed pagan has not in his own tradition a path toward that spirituality which the Christian churches offer him , in any case Christ never said that warships should accompany , even at a distance , those who bring the good news . Their presence changes the nature of the message . It is difficult to retain the supernatural virtues attributed to the blood of the martyrs when it is avenged by force of arms . You are asking for more trumps in your hand than is allowed when you want at one and the same time Caesar and the Cross.26 Human violence belongs to the social and political domains . And this violence can not be reconciled with Christianity because it corrupts the image of Christ in the same way as the Great Beast disavows true religiosity . Even when Weil reluctantly gave up being a pacifist in order to maintain logical consistency , she admitted that to take up arms is to acknowledge the justice of all harm that might come to all willing participants , including herself , as a result . In no uncertain terms , Weil affirms that all forms of violence are blatant contradictions of Jesus ’ example , and therefore , those who rationalize the implementation of physical threat or force , are decidedly not acting in a Christ-like manner . “ Whoever takes up the sword shall perish by the sword . And whoever does not take up the sword ( or lets it go ) shall perish on the cross. ” 27 To be Christian is to bear the cross . Weil ’ s position against Christian missionaries is far more than a political condemnation of violence and colonialism , however . She constructed philosophical-religious arguments against this practice . She witnessed the damaging effects of what she calls “ uprootedness ” —when people are forced ( i.e. , they do not freely give their consent ) to abandon their land , their language , their cultural traditions and literatures , and especially their religion.28 This type of being “ torn asunder ” is not the same as the one she positively described with respect to the cross . The former consists in the deprivation of others ’ ability to renounce their egos and consent to the void ; the latter is the effect of experiencing God ’ s love and consenting to loving him in return . They produce opposite results . Uprootedness strips life of any sense of meaning and order . This is why she writes in her letter to Father Couturier , “ I think that for any man a change of religion is as dangerous a thing as a change of language is for a writer . It may turn out a success , but it can also have disastrous consequences. ” 29 By definition , conversion to a different faith under duress is not consensual and , thus , not born out of love . There lingers a reasonable doubt regarding the authenticity of the act . Moreover , conversion is not merely a question of changing systems of belief . Missionaries ’ pretensions to the possibility of humans convincing other humans that their present religious tradition is inferior to Christianity , and thus should be relinquished in favor of “ accepting Jesus Christ as lord and savior , ” is grossly arrogant in her view . It is hubristic in the same way as is the use of political force and potentially equally damaging to its intended targets . Religious truth is not arrived at in winning a theological disputation or through appeals to emotion , fear , pride , et cetera . Hence , Weil emphatically condemns all missionary practices : “ It is , therefore , useless to send out missions to prevail upon the peoples of Asia , Africa or Oceania to enter the Church. ” 30 The basis for her defense of other religious traditions goes well beyond her critique of Christian missionaries ’ role in colonialism or its own internal theological and ethical contradictions , however . Weil was very learned about other religions and cultures . She expended a significant amount of time and effort learning languages , such as ancient Greek and Sanskrit , in order to study other traditions ’ sacred literature . During the course of her studies , she found a great deal of inspiration and truth in their teachings and practices . She went so far as to affirm the truth claims made by other religious traditions . Every time a man has , with a pure heart , called upon Osiris , Dionysus , Krishna , Buddha , the Tao , etc. , the Son of God has answered him by sending the Holy Spirit . And the Holy Spirit has acted upon his soul , not by inciting him to abandon his religious tradition , but by bestowing upon him light—and in the best of cases the fullness of light—in the heart of that same religious tradition.31 From this passage it is clear that Weil does not view non-Christian religions as competing with Christianity in the marketplace of ideas , where the religion or denomination with the highest numbers wins , or where one tradition will be declared the sole victor on the epistemic battlefield . Theologians that think in such combative terms tend to focus on the differences between their orthodox set of beliefs , doctrines , and rites and those of other religious traditions . This is especially true of Christians with an evangelical mission . The process leading up to the Christians ’ inevitable self-declared victory includes not only a systematic theological account of their own tradition , but also by extension translating other religious traditions into Christian theological terms so as to demonstrate on what bases Christian belief is incompatible and , ultimately , they presuppose , superior to those non-Christian religions . This is why , for example , it has become quite natural for uneducated and unsympathetic Western commentators to desire a ( Protestant type ) reformation in Islam ( with the hopes of finding the Muslim “ Martin Luther ” 32 ) , as if Islam is simply on a parallel trajectory , only lagging hundreds of years behind Christianity and littered with mistaken premises . At the same time , these commentaries betray the arrogant assumption that Christianity ( or the so-called West ) in its present form is obviously superior to Islam in its traditional and present forms . Or take as another illustration of this point , the professor teaching a course on World Religions , World Humanities , or other non-Christian based worldviews who must frequently contend with students ’ questions or comments situating whatever concept or practice being discussed vis-à-vis Christianity : “ X is like/unlike Christianity in the following way ( s ) . . . ” As well intentioned as the students ’ efforts may be , they nevertheless skew the subject matter by forcing everything into Christian theological terms . Although , as we will see shortly , Weil , too , errs on the side of assimilationism , at this stage we want to demonstrate her ecumenical leanings . Rather than compatibility/incompatibility being the basis of critical analysis in order to determine once and for all which , if any , of these traditions has legitimate claims to truth , Weil takes the stance that most religious traditions are equally true . She writes , The story of the creation and of original sin in Genesis is true . But other stories about the creation and original sin in other traditions are also true and also contain incomparably precious truths . They are different reflections of a unique truth untranslatable into human words . One can divine this truth through one of these reflections . One can divine it still better through several of them.33 If we recall that Weil maintains that the intellect is limited and , therefore , no single ( i.e. , limited ) vantage can fully grasp and articulate the divine , then her stance on non-Christian religions is consistent . Hence , she advises that Christians can learn a great deal of truth and obtain wisdom from intense study of all religious traditions ( with a few exceptions ) . However , she also understands that the “ comparison of religions is only possible , in some measure , through the miraculous virtue of sympathy. ” 34 Clearly , antagonistic theological outlooks—that is , those looking for and emphasizing differences between religious traditions for the sake of self-assurance—preclude the possibility of such sympathy . But Weil approaches the encounter between faith traditions very seriously and , at least initially , she does so openly and offers important insights relevant to contemporary ecumenical dialogues and comparative approaches to the study of religion . We quote her at length : We can know men to a certain extent if at the same time as we observe them from outside we manage by sympathy to transport our own soul into theirs for a time . In the same way the study of different religions does not lead to a real knowledge of them unless we transport ourselves for a time by faith to the very center of whichever one we are studying . Here , moreover , this word faith is used in its strongest sense . This scarcely ever happens , for some have no faith , and the others have faith exclusively in one religion and only bestow upon the others the sort of attention we give to strangely shaped shells . There are others again who think they are capable of impartiality because they have only a vague religiosity which they can turn indifferently in any direction , whereas , on the contrary , we must have given all our attention , all our faith , all our love to a particular religion in order to think of any other religion with the high degree of attention , faith , and love that is proper to it . In the same way , only those who are capable of friendship can take a real heartfelt interest in the fate of an utter stranger.35 Defensive postures are just as prohibitive to learning as aggressive ones in comparative religious studies . Being guarded renders the encounter disingenuous in a very real sense , according to Weil and probably prevents the encounter altogether . Take for example an actress . A good actress becomes the character she is portraying on stage . Her dialect , bodily gestures , facial expressions , et cetera must be—not just appear—natural . To the degree that she accomplishes this transformation through an essential vulnerability to the narrative she brings the performance to life . If the audience can perceive that she is “ acting , ” it is because she is perceptibly someone other than the character she is portraying . The most common source of the inability of the actress to step outside of herself and into character is that she is too self-conscious . Stage fright is the result of being hyper self-aware and neurotic . Failed actors , in other words , are those who are always consciously not the characters they portray . In the same way , all approaches to other religions fail when the participants remain self-consciously and guardedly at a distance . Catholics , Weil reminds Father Couturier , admit as much while defending or promulgating their faith . The Catholic religion contains explicitly truths which other religions contain implicitly . But , conversely , other religions contain explicitly truths which are only implicit in Christianity . The most well-informed Christian can still learn a great deal concerning divine matters from other religious traditions ; although inward spiritual light can also cause him to apprehend everything through the medium of his own tradition . All the same , were these other traditions to disappear from the face of the earth , it would be an irreparable loss . The missionaries have already made far too many of them disappear as it is . St. John of the Cross compares faith to reflections of silver , truth being gold . The various authentic religious traditions are different reflections of the same truth , and perhaps equally precious . But we do not realize this , because each of us lives only one of these traditions and sees the others from outside . But as Catholics are for ever repeating—and rightly—to unbelievers , a religion can only be known from the inside.36 What Weil thinks is necessary for the study of other religions is actual sympathy , and this is only possible when the possibility exists for genuine friendship . ( In the next section we will examine the complications created by the dictum “ Love thy enemies ” in Christian theology with respect to Judaism and Islam and how it manifests itself in Weil ’ s most controversial writings . ) Friendship , however , is equally rare as it entails openness , vulnerability , and the “ consent to preserve an autonomy within ourselves and in others. ” 37 In other words , there ought to be no ulterior motives in the study of other religions ; that is , there can be no desire to transform or to convert them , even , or especially , for the sake of self-preservation or self-enlargement . The list of religious and ancient cultural traditions Weil admires is as long as it is diverse : Hinduism,38 the ancient Greeks39 and Egyptians,40 Taoism , Buddhism , European mythology and folklore,41 among others . And , we must not forget , she even holds atheism in high regard . The consequence of her openness to other ways of ( religious ) thinking hints to a sort of flattening out of distinctions , however . One can only imagine , for instance , Father Couturier ’ s initial reaction when he read Weil ’ s account of the parallelism between Christian theism and atheism : “ So likewise an atheist or an ‘ infidel , ’ capable of pure compassion , are as close to God as is a Christian , and consequently know Him equally well , although their knowledge is expressed in other words , or remains unspoken. ” 42 Comparative approaches to religion and philosophy , even with the best intentions , are prone to conflating all traditions to a single universal truth . The argument goes that each tradition remains distinct in its outward ( exoteric ) manifestations ( i.e. , orthodox sets of beliefs , sacred literatures , and rites ) , but also , at the same time , each expresses the same transcendent truth ( i.e. , the Divine ) .43 Inspiration for this type of thinking is most commonly found among the mystics ( esotericism ) . Weil , in fact , evinces a similar conclusion when she writes , In practice , mystics belonging to nearly all the religious traditions coincide to the extent that they can hardly be distinguished . They represent the truth of each of these traditions . The contemplation practiced in India , Greece , China , etc. , is just as supernatural as that of the Christian mystics . More particularly , there exists a very close affinity between Plato and , for example , St. John of the Cross . Also between Hindu Upanishads and St. John of the Cross . Taoism too is very close to Christian mysticism . The Orphic and Pythagorean mysteries were authentic mystical traditions . Likewise the Eleusinian.44 But if we look carefully at the wording of this otherwise innocuous passage , we see signs of assimilationism . Granted , this passage appears in the context of a letter written to a Catholic friar for the purpose of posing to him Weil ’ s specifically Christian theological questions , but in each comparative citation , the benchmark is a Christian mystic . She does not demonstrate her point by offering a comparison between Taoism and the Hindu Upanishads , for instance . This tendency to simultaneously uphold the legitimacy of non-Christian religions by their relation to Christianity occurs repeatedly in her letter ( and other writings ) . As another case in point , she writes , “ There have perhaps been among various peoples ( India , Egypt , China , Greece ) sacred Scriptures revealed in the same manner as the Jewish-Christian Scriptures. ” 45 Up until this point we have seen that Weil insists that we “ consent to preserve an autonomy . . . in others. ” Yet , in the instances cited above and in many others as well , she departs from this position and adopts a more typical attempt to value non-Christian religions on the basis of their intimations of Christianity.46 In particular , she finds ( rather hypocritically we must add ) these other religious traditions agreeable insofar as she can detect in them acceptance of incarnationism , actual incarnations , or even a foreshadowing of the incarnation in the body of Christ . Hence , in the passage quoted earlier , she identifies the Holy Spirit as that which bestowed light on the prophets of the non-Christian religions included in her assemblage.47 In some of these traditions , such as the ancient Eleusinian mysteries , the Holy Spirit manifested itself in the sacred rites , which , according to Weil , “ were real sacraments , possessing the same virtue as baptism or the eucharist. ” This is true , however , only insofar as they presage “ Christ ’ s Passion ” which was “ then to come . Today it is past . Past and future are symmetrical , ” 48 she informs Father Couturier . With respect to some religions , Weil takes the radical position—especially for a Christian—that some of those prophets may have been , not merely human messengers of God , but actual divine incarnations . “ At all events , ” Weil writes to the Dominican priest , “ we do not know for certain that there have not been incarnations previous to that of Jesus , and that Osiris in Egypt , Krishna in India were not of that number. ” 49 The takeaway from all of this is that Weil ’ s Christian conviction , in the end , does color her perception of other religions . Although she views many religions in a favorable light—because after all , according to her , they all reflect the light of the Holy Spirit sent by the Son of God—there are others , as we will see in the next section , that are distinguished and excluded from her positive assessment . In fact , she is outright antagonistic toward them primarily on the basis of their denial of the Christian theological doctrine of the incarnation . Love ’ s implicit enemies—The Jew , the Muslim Relatively little of what Weil wrote was ever published during her lifetime . The majority of her writings , from which scholars have since pieced together her philosophical-religious views , were published posthumously and mainly consist of letters and her reflections recorded in her cahiers ( notebooks ) . Weil never intended , of course , for her personal correspondences and scattered notes to be made public . She left her notebooks with her friend and confidante Gustave Thibon for safekeeping before she left for America with her family in 1942.50 She died the next year . In 1947 Thibon published a collection of passages from her notebooks under the title , La pésanteur et la grâce ( translated into English as Gravity and Grace ) .51 The publication of this collection nearly coincided with the Zionist formation of the state of Israel in 1948 , and as Thomas Nevin has observed , “ More than any other volume bearing her name , with the possible exception of Attente de Dieu [ Waiting for God ] , published three years later , La pésanteur et la grâce shaped Weil ’ s image and reputation for her first generation of readers. ” 52 This work is especially important for the impact it made and continues to make upon Weil ’ s English language audience , including the present authors . Anticipating a negative backlash to the selections Thibon collated under the heading “ Israel , ” especially in the aftermath of World War II , the editors of the first translation into English published by Routledge in 1952 omitted this section . The omission has just recently been rectified when , according to Lawrence Schmidt , “ Under pressure from [ Palle ] Yourgrau , Routledge had the chapter translated by Mario von der Ruhr and finally included in the ‘ First Complete English language edition ’ published in 2002. ” 53 What exactly did Weil write in these passages that the editors feared would prove detrimental to her reception in the English-speaking world ? Before we answer that question , it does bear noting that their suspicions have been justified , even if their decision to censor the material has not . Few commentators have resisted taking Weil—and her admirers—to task for “ her narrow , willful , and ignorant reading of Judaism. ” 54 The list of prominent scholars and public intellectuals who criticize her for “ rejecting ” or even “ hating her Jewish identity ” includes : George Steiner , Robert Coles , Anna Freud , Alfred Kazin , Rachel Brenner , Witold Rabi , and Jeffrey Mehlman.55 Emmanuel Levinas—perhaps her most eminent critic ( and admirer ) —goes so far as to declare that , “ Simone Weil hates the Bible [ i.e. , the Old Testament , or Torah ] . ” 56 Perhaps Levinas ’ curt summation of Weil ’ s position on Judaism is correct . But given Weil ’ s otherwise consistent appeal to reason and compassion , it bears examining how she arrived at what others perceive as obviously mistaken and prejudicial positions , ones that run contrary to the entirety of her religious philosophy . Despite countless analyses and cautions about the dangers inherent in the union of theology and politics ( see Weil ’ s own warnings as discussed above and in Chapter 1 ) , religious intellectuals continue to construct apologia while denouncing what they deem fundamental misunderstandings and misappropriations of religious ethical-social-political values . In fact , it is often argued that it is precisely within religious discourse that the kernels of universal justice ( and human rights ) are to be found . Weil is one of those figures frequently cited and praised as a fecund source of religio-political inspiration—as someone who embodies and articulates a true Christian ethos , rooted in the unconditional love of God , and who advocates universal justice against the tyrannies of relativism , capitalism , bureaucracy , and totalitarianism . That being said , in the section on Israel ( Judaism ) published in Gravity and Grace , in addition to other comments found throughout her cahiers and personal correspondences , one finds severe and unforgiving criticisms of Judaism—and Islam—that lack the intellectual sensitivity with which she otherwise has come to be associated . Take for example the following passage , in which she writes , Evil is to be purified—or life is not possible . God alone can do that . This is the idea of the Gita . It is also the idea of Moses , of Mahomet , of Hitlerism . . . But Jehovah , Allah , Hitler are earthly Gods . The purification they bring about is imaginary.57 Jehovah ( the God of the Jews ) , Allah ( the God of the Muslims ) , and Hitler ( the God of the Nazis ) are grouped together in her purview , and stand diametrically opposed to the nonimaginary purifications she contends are offered by the God of the Christian and the Hindu , and intimated by the ancient Greeks , among others . This supposition demands serious investigation if thinking about Weil ’ s religious philosophy is to remain relevant and responsible . The first sign of the estrangement of Judaism and Islam in Weil ’ s philosophy is their conspicuous absence from the catalog of religions that she held in high regard.58 When either of the religions that share the Abrahamic heritage with Christianity is mentioned in the same passage as the non-Christian traditions she favored , it is usually for the purpose of serving as the foil in her argument . As Levinas observes about Weil ’ s treatment of Judaism in his jeremiad , “ Only Greek , Chaldean , Egyptian and Hindu writings contain an unsullied generosity . Jews possess only a God for armies—how horrible ! ” 59 The basis of her caustic criticisms of Judaism and Islam is twofold : both religions , she claims , are motivated by a will to power , and they both reject the incarnation . As we have seen , these are not unrelated issues in Weil ’ s philosophy . Building her case for the former accusation , she writes , “ The veritable idolatry is covetousness . . . and the Jewish nation , in its thirst for carnal good , was guilty of this in the very moments even when it was worshipping its God . The Hebrews took for their idol , not something made of metal or wood , but a race , a nation , something just as earthly . Their religion is essentially inseparable from such idolatry , because of the notion of the ‘ chosen people. ’ ” 60 To put this slightly differently , according to Weil ’ s reading of the Old Testament,61 instead of truly renouncing idolatry as was commanded— “ You shall not make for yourself an idol , whether in the form of anything that is in heaven above , or that is on the earth beneath . . . ” ( Exodus 20:4 ) —and worshipping the invisible and self-renouncing God , the Hebrews desired other nations ’ earthly wealth and power . To acquire it , Weil contends that they constructed a theology—one with a remarkably complicit God—that hypocritically denounces idol worship while simultaneously erecting itself as the new idol—the nation of Israel . Following this line of reasoning , Weil concludes that Judaism is in essence an “ [ e ] xclusively collective religion. ” 62 As such , its aspirations are purely temporal and of this world , and the means it employs to attain those ambitions are of the same kind.63 The God of the Jews not only committed violent acts , as recorded in the Old Testament , but He also commanded—thereby providing a supposedly divine justification for—Jews to commit mass atrocities in order to achieve their own self-serving ends with a great cost for their neighbors . Weil finds this ethically reproachable , and logically inconsistent with the God she knows via Christ . The language she uses in her critical retellings should sound quite familiar , as it is the very language she employs against idolatrous ersatz religions formed and perpetuated by the Great Beast ( see Chapter 1 ) : The Hebrews call their own collective soul God ; they pretended , and convinced themselves , that it was the creator and ruler of heaven and earth . This was not always easy to believe . . . Nevertheless , it seems that it must have given them an extra strength . As for the neighboring peoples , they had to be conquered before they could be convinced of it . Their neighbors were unwilling to associate with them except on terms which obliged them to practice idolatry , because their claim to possess God as a national fetish and to possess him exclusively implied a terrifyingly imperialist outlook . With a people which was still weak and very unmilitary , and which had been broken by slavery , such an attitude could hardly succeed.64 She adds , “ With the Moslems it [ i.e. , theologically motivated conquest ] succeeded much better. ” 65 For , according to Weil , Muslims , too , “ aspired to temporal domination in the name of religion , ” 66 and , she writes elsewhere in her cahiers , “ They made converts , not without a certain amount of violence. ” 67 Drawing a direct connection between Judaism and what she has previously called the Great Beast , she declares , “ What we call idolatry is to a large extent an invention of Jewish fanaticism. ” And then she goes on to speculate in her letter to Father Couturier , “ If some Hebrews of classical Jewry were to return to life and were to be provided with arms , they would exterminate the lot of us—men , women and children , for the crime of idolatry . They would reproach us for worshipping Baal and Astarte , taking Christ for Baal and the Virgin for Astarte. ” 68 In summation , Weil concludes that both Judaism and Islam are essentially idolatrous , fundamentally violent , and purely politically minded ersatz religions . In addition , theologically they exclude the possibility of the one pure means to resolve the problem of the will to power . The real crux of the matter , or at least the most deep-seated basis of her anti-Jewish and anti-Islamic point of view , rests on the centrality of the incarnation in her thought . As we demonstrated in the previous section , Weil ’ s positive assessment of some non-Christian traditions comes at the expense of those religions in and of themselves , on their own terms , as she values them only insofar as they corroborate the Christian belief in the incarnation . The same can not be said of Judaism and Islam . “ In reality the process by which Simone Weil establishes this perfidy of the Jews is at the very least original , ” writes Levinas , who then adds , “ It consists first of all in crediting every nation on earth , with the exception of Israel , with a prefiguration of the Passion. ” 69 In her own words , Weil posits as irrevocable truth : There can be no personal contact between man and God except through the person of the Mediator . Without the latter , God can only be present to man collectively , nationally . Israel chose the national God and simultaneously rejected the Mediator ; it may , at one time or another , have moved towards true monotheism , but it always fell back on , and was unable not to fall back on , the God of the tribe.70 The theologies of both Judaism and Islam deny this theological claim . “ The prophet , ” according to the Jewish theologian Abraham Joshua Heschel , “ is a person . . . . The prophet ’ s task is to convey a divine view , yet as a person he is a point of view. ” 71 The prophet does not lose his particularity ( personhood ) and is not , in other words , identifiable as being God incarnate ; he always maintains a certain distance from God . Theologically , Judaism and Islam have more in common than either independently has with Christianity on this very basis . But Christian political theology has succeeded in dividing them from one another ( the habitual refrain “ Judeo-Christian ” has the effect of theologically disavowing Islam from its Abrahamic heritage ) , perhaps for the purposes of conquering both . In his book , The Jew , the Arab : A History of the Enemy , Gil Anidjar has convincingly argued that the Jew and the Arab ( i.e. , Muslim ) are prefigured as the implicit enemies of Christianity ( and by extension , of Europe and the West ) .72 As it says in the Gospel of Matthew , “ one ’ s foes will be members of one ’ s own household. ” 73 Upon a certain reading , then , Christianity ’ s foes , in other words , are its Abrahamic companion religions , Judaism and Islam . First , they are made identical with one another : non-Christian . But , the commandment is to “ love thy enemies ” thereby necessitating there to be not a single enemy but numerous enemies within the “ household. ” Second , Judaism and Islam must be separated from one another to account for this plurality . Following the generation of Augustine ’ s and Aquinas ’ just war theories , Anidjar explains how Christianity ’ s enemies came to be distinguished from one another , first by spatial metaphor , “ near ” ( Judaism ) and “ far ” ( Islam ) , and subsequently , on theological and political grounds : Aquinas [ in Summa contra Gentiles ] distinguishes and separates the Jew from the Arab , the Jew from the Muslim , by affirming that a theological struggle , a religious disputation , is possible only on the basis of a prior agreement , a consensus and common ground , a common text . Such theological common ground is available only with the Jews , not the Muslims . [ Aquinas writes , ] “ The Mohammedans and the pagans do not agree with us in accepting authority of any scripture . . . . Thus , against the Jews we are able to argue by means of the Old Testament , while against heretics we are able to argue by means of the New Testament . But the Mohammedans and the pagans accept neither the one nor the other. ” 74 Judaism is cast , therefore , as the internal theological enemy of Christianity . Despite there being theological differences , in part there remains a shared scriptural tradition . Perceiving no theological common ground with Islam , then , Aquinas locates Islam on the other end of the spectrum and reduces it to being the external political enemy of Christianity . Anidjar goes on to enumerate a litany of casualties of this line of thinking . Because the pinnacle of Weil ’ s religious philosophy is incarnationism—a theological contention—she does not maintain the distinction between Judaism and Islam as explained above ; they are both theological and political enemies . Precisely due to their theological denial of the incarnation , they are deemed by her to be motivated by political desires . It is only through the incarnation that a ( non-imaginary ) just balance can be established . Christ ( or Krishna , etc . ) is the lynchpin . As she says to Father Couturier , “ [ T ] here is no purity without participating in the divine incarnation . . . ” 75 What remains is an either/or decision on the incarnation . All religions , therefore , that refuse or even refute the incarnation , are impure ( i.e. , have made the wrong decision and , therefore , willfully perpetuate an unjust balance ) in her view . “ It is Platonic clarity which haunts Simone Weil , ” 76 writes Emmanuel Levinas . Ironically , her exacting analyses of the crises facing humanity , and her equally precise and tightly woven solutions to those crises , arrive at a single absolute principle from which she can not waver , no matter what the consequences . As we have already discussed , Weil “ found unacceptable and repugnant the Church ’ s refusal to disavow or to be contrite over past actions that had destroyed vulnerable human lives. ” 77 In fact , as E. Jane Doering has noted , Weil intended to write an essay summarizing “ her thoughts on the need to redirect the course of Christianity , purge it of influences that glorified force , power , and prestige , and eliminate the idea of exclusivity. ” 78 But because of her utter reliance on the incarnation to solve perennial philosophical , religious , and , by extension , social and political dilemmas , she ultimately sides with religion as being in sole possession of political authority . So-called religions that do not at the very least intimate Christianity , such as Islam and Judaism , “ the Great Beast [ s ] of religion , ” are “ not likable , ” for , as she says , “ [ t ] he Great Beast is always repulsive. ” 79 As Doering explains further , “ Weil had come to the firm conviction that the Christian spirituality of love , charity , and faith had to permeate any civilization that wished to counter the force of gravity in human nature that pulled human beings toward the exploitation of their fellow beings. ” 80 This point is made abundantly clear when Weil concludes , “ There can be no legitimacy without religion , ” 81 which she has narrowly defined to the exclusion of the Jew and the Muslim . The practical implications of this line of thinking are frightfully clear . Weil ends up where she began , but , unfortunately , this time on the other side of the proverbial coin . What at first was the subject of her philosophical-religious critique , Weil now forcefully advocates during what amounts to the construction of her own political-theology . She reminds us that Christ did not “ prescribe the abolition of penal justice. ” 82 Then , she adds , the “ legal character of a punishment has no true significance if it does not give it some kind of religious meaning . . . and therefore all penal offices , from that of the judge to that of the executioner and the prison guard , should in some sort share in the priestly office. ” 83 The interlocking of the political apparatus and the supernatural sounds suspiciously familiar to the unholy union she identified at the root of the Church ’ s abuses , and , which , she originally sought to expose and challenge . Then , in a move so flagrantly contradictory to her prior criticisms of the Church to be almost unthinkable , at one point Weil condones anathema sit . In the fourteenth question that she poses to Father Couturier , she says , To keep in line with St. John , [ the Church ] should never have excommunicated any except the Docetae , those who deny the Incarnation . The definition of faith according to the catechism of the Council of Trent ( firm belief in everything taught by the Church ) is very far removed from that of St. John , for whom faith was purely and simply belief in the Incarnation of the Son of God in the person of Jesus . . . . According to St. John , the Church has never had the right to excommunicate any one who truly believed Christ to be the Son of God come down to earth in the flesh.84 We might concede that this makes sense internally to Christianity ; that is , only those who accept the incarnation are properly “ Christian. ” But Weil has already made clear that identity in a collective is in itself problematic for the universalist message revealed in Christ—hence , her own resistance to baptism . As if the contrariety of her position is not confounding enough , in the very next question to the friar—numbered fifteen—she returns to her usual habit of admonishing the Church for , among other things , not having “ learned from [ the ] parable [ of the Good Samaritan ] never to excommunicate any who practices love of his neighbor. ” 85 Weil would have been aware of the original Greek usage of the term anathema , especially in the biblical context , where it denotes “ the object of a curse. ” 86 All who do not accept the truth of incarnation , or intimate it , are cursed and are rightfully banished according to Weil who cites St. John as precedent , else the host society risk contagion . They are enemies . Consequently , Weil ’ s critique of Judaism turns into blame.87 First , because Judaism is an earthly religion , in her account , and Jesus ’ message inverts that perspective in favor of the truly transcendent because loving God,88 she holds the Jews ( in connection with the Romans ) responsible for Jesus ’ crucifixion , saying that they are , “ [ a ] people chosen for blindness , chosen to be Christ ’ s executioner. ” 89 Accusing Jews of the persecution and eventual murder of Jesus is certainly not original , and historically it has accompanied sinister intentions resulting in abhorrent and bloody consequences . This brings to mind the second and most sweeping and bewildering charge she levels against Judaism . Namely , Weil blames Judaism for corrupting Christendom . . . . To speak of an ‘ educational God ’ in connection with this people [ Jews ] is a cruel joke . It is not astonishing that there should be so much evil in a civilization—ours [ i.e. , Christian European ] —contaminated to the core , in its very inspiration , by this terrible lie . The curse of Israel rests on Christendom . Israel meant atrocities , the Inquisition , the extermination of heretics and infidels . Israel meant ( and to a certain extent still does . . . ) capitalism . Israel means totalitarianism , especially with regard to its worst enemies.90 What is astonishing to us , alongside countless other critics , is that , given her own sensitivity to the rise of Nazism , she intimates their anti-Semitic rhetoric . After all , Nazi propaganda , likewise , framed European Jewry as a contagion . And this language , as it was designed to do , incited violence and genocidal behavior . But as Weil sees it , Judaism is a spiritual saboteur of Christianity and European civilization . “ The Jews , that handful of uprooted people , have caused the uprootedness of the whole terrestrial globe , ” she writes , continuing , Their involvement in Christianity has made of Christendom , in regard to its own past , something uprooted . The orientation of the Enlightenment , 1789 , secularism , etc . have infinitely increased this uprooting , through the lie of progress . And uprooted Europe has uprooted the rest of the world , by colonial conquest . Capitalism , totalitarianism , have a share in this progressive uprootedness . . .91 Her claim , as absurd and obscene as it sounds , is that Judaism set off a domino effect resulting in every major crisis in the classical and modern worlds , including and especially the spiritual crisis in Christianity and all the sins it has perpetrated falsely in the name of Christ.92 These remarks must be read in conjunction with an important biographical note , lest they result in the mistaken impression that Weil was ( self- ) hateful of the Jewish race . In August 1940 Weil applied for a teaching post , hoping to be assigned to one of the French colonies as a means to get out of France . After not having received a reply , she inferred that she had been denied an appointment due to the racist policies of the Vichy government as outlined in the statute concerning Jews that was issued on October 3 , 1940 . According to her friend and biographer Simone Pétrement , who ascertained the following based on documents she obtained while compiling research for her book , Weil had actually been “ appointed a professor at the girls ’ lycée in Constantine on October 1 , 1940 , ” but , “ for some reason the information never reached her. ” 93 Unaware of her appointment , in November Weil composed a sardonic reply to the Minister of Education . Similar to the letter she sent to Father Couturier , in this letter Weil poses a series of questions to the unsuspecting Minister of Education . This letter , unlike the one written in earnest to the Dominican priest , however , is dripping with sarcasm and is intended to lay bare the racist ideology at the heart of Nazism and their Vichy collaborators . She opens the letter stating her intentions . “ I want to know to whom this Statute applies , so that I may be enlightened as to my own standing . I do not know the definition of the word ‘ Jew ’ ; that subject was not included in my education. ” 94 Citing the statute ’ s exact wording , which stated that a “ Jew ” is “ a person who has three or more Jewish grandparents , ” 95 Weil proceeds by constantly referring to herself as the case in point , forcing the Minister , should he respond , to provide her with a clear definition of the term as well as to explain how his office determined that she fit the definition . Does the term “ Jew ” denote someone of the Jewish faith , or does it denote someone of the Jewish race , she queries ? If it designates the former , she informs him that she has “ never been in a synagogue , and [ has ] never witnessed a Jewish religious ceremony. ” 96 Then , in a mordacious tone , she writes , “ On the other hand , I know definitely that both my maternal grandparents were free-thinkers. ” 97 “ But perhaps , ” she continues , “ the word designates a race ? ” To which Weil explains that , according to the historian Josephus , Titus succeeded in exterminating this race , and so “ it seems highly unlikely that they left many descendents. ” 98 So , how exactly did the Vichy government verify that she was of the Jewish race , she asks , to which , in the same manner that Socrates answered his own questions in the Apology , Weil surmises that it would “ be quite difficult to get reliable information on this point. ” 99 Weil closes the letter asking once again , “ But I should like to be officially enlightened on this point , since I myself have no criterion by which I may resolve the question. ” 100 Not surprisingly , Weil “ never received a reply. ” 101 Pétrement soberly summarizes the gist of this letter as follows : Obviously this letter did not mean that Simone was not in solidarity with other Jews . The arguments she raises in regard to race were valuable for all Jews . On the contrary , she was mocking the “ Statutory Regulations on Jews ” and the confused ideas on which all anti-Semitic racism rests.102 Although for some the temptation to claim otherwise has proven too much to resist , in this light it is clear that Weil was not racist . Even if she did not use such derogatory language in the exact same manner employed by the Nazis , however , it is inexcusable for a thinker with such intellectual acuity , and one so morally minded , to be as callous and unjust in her treatment of Judaism and , we would add , Islam . “ Simone Weil ’ s anti-biblical passion , ” Levinas cautioned , “ could wound and trouble Jews. ” 103 Her remarks about Judaism and Islam can not be passed over or uncritically accepted as being benign . What are we , then , to make of them ? To begin , we follow Levinas and other critics who have exposed Weil ’ s ignorance of Judaism . Weil never took the time to study Hebrew , or Arabic for that matter , not to forget her nonchalant condemnations of Islam . She admits as much throughout her writings when she confidently corrects translations of ancient Greek , without any reference to their Hebrew equivalents when it would be appropriate . Her demand for accuracy in representing religious symbols and religious language seems not to matter so much to her with respect to the Jewish and Islamic traditions . One could go so far as to say that her approach to Jewish and Islamic literature is dilettantish . As a result , her readings of each are reductive and , at times , childishly naïve . As Levinas writes in his rejoinder to Weil ’ s interpretation of Judaism , We can not reproach Simone Weil ’ s culture for being ignorant of the fact that notions like goodness are not simple , and that they can call up and encapsulate notions which seem opposed to them . And while the dialectic of Christian experience excites her , she is content to remain on the level of immediate notions whenever it involves referring to the Old Testament . Here she casually repeats Voltaire ’ s argument that “ Abraham began by prostituting his wife. ” 104 Furthermore , her biased reading of the Old Testament—and near nonexistent reading of the Qu ’ ran or other Islamic literature—lacks nuance and sophistication . It also lacks humility . It is difficult to fathom that the author of these commentaries on the Old Testament is the same astute reader of ancient Greek texts , such as Iliad or Antigone , or the Bhagavad Gita . But , as Levinas rightly notes , Weil misses a fundamental yet obvious point about the stories in the Old Testament . Israel is not a model people , but a free people . It is of course , like any people , filled with lust and tempted by carnal delights . The Bible tells us of this lust in order to denounce it , but also knows that it is not enough to deny . It seeks to elevate matters by introducing the notion of justice.105 Weil interprets most of the stories in the Old Testament as mythical affirmations of the collective desire of the Jewish people . Somehow she managed to gloss over much of the inherent complexity that exists within Judaism and Islam and their sacred literatures . But Weil presumes that a true religious text must provide people with an exact model of goodness , one that uniformly solves all dilemmas in the same manner as the Passion of Christ in the New Testament . In the end , we are justified in being suspicious of the conclusions she draws . To carry forward a metaphor we previously used , in her treatment of Judaism and Islam , we can see plainly that she is acting . She never succeeds in having true sympathy with them . Recall that she said to be in a position to claim knowledge of another religion is to “ transport ourselves for a time by faith to the very center of whichever [ religion ] we are studying. ” What is required , in other words , is to “ have given all our attention , all our faith , all our love . . . that is proper to it. ” 106 By her own standards , Weil ’ s readings of Judaism and Islam are clearly done in bad faith . Like a failed actress , she never loses herself in the role of being a Jew or a Muslim ; she remains self-conscious—that is , consciously Christian—and , therefore , at a critical distance from these religions . Her own personality intrudes upon the scene . Thus , she never consents to their autonomy which is necessary—again according to her own philosophy—for friendship . In this way she affirms our suspicion that Judaism and Islam are the implicit , if not explicit , enemies of Weil ’ s Christian love . In retrospect , Weil ’ s treatment of Judaism and Islam backs her into a corner , and the best possible explanation is that she is guilty of not practicing her own philosophy . On one hand , she champions the disenfranchised , the downtrodden , the outcasts , the afflicted , and , generally speaking , the most vulnerable among us . Weil questions the social , political , and religious boundaries created by self-interested will to power . She challenges the Church and its complicity with values and practices contrary to Christ ’ s exemplarity . She even seeks wisdom within a plurality of religious and cultural traditions and denounces Christian missionaries and the colonization of indigenous peoples . On the other hand , because she staunchly opposes relativism , and following the Platonic model , thinks justice can only be had through a universalizable truth , her system hinges on an abiding belief in an absolute , unchanging , transcendent ideal—God . As Levinas observes of her philosophy , “ Good [ is turned ] into an absolutely pure idea [ by Weil ] , excluding all contamination or violence. ” 107 This ideal , this goodness , was most clearly embodied in Christ . As consequence , other religions are valued insofar as they either have within them possible events of incarnationism or admit of the possibility of the incarnation of God in Christ . Otherwise , her system does not hold together—to the detriment of Jews and Muslims above all . Another way of framing the tensions in Weil ’ s thought about Judaism in particular , especially given her letter to the Minister of Education , is to place her within the long line of Jewish intellectuals who struggle with the question of what it means to be Jewish . And it is here that Weil ’ s criticisms can at least serve as an occasion to consider some important religious , ethical , and political concerns specifically pertaining to Judaism , and where , unpredictably , her philosophy parallels other Jewish thinkers in some fascinating and potentially incisive ways . On October 22 , 2009 , New York University ’ s Institute for Public Knowledge , the Social Science Research Council , and Stony Brook University convened four of the most prominent living philosophers—Judith Butler , Jürgen Habermas , Charles Taylor , and Cornel West—for a colloquy on religion in the public sphere.108 Butler ’ s presentation was titled , “ Is Judaism Zionism ? ” 109 As promised by the title , in her lecture she dared ask the question that Weil posed to the Minister of Education : “ What is a Jew ? ” It goes without saying that the answer to this question has taken on special importance since the rise of anti-Semitism , Nazism , and the Holocaust . But now it is also recast in light of the formation of the state of Israel on the basis of a Zionist philosophy . For many Jews and non-Jews , Zionism has come to be synonymous with Judaism . But for many others , again both Jewish and non-Jewish alike , Zionism and Judaism are not identical . There is a sense of urgency surrounding this question due to the ongoing occupations of the West Bank and Gaza , and the human rights abuses suffered by Palestinians , and even non-Jewish immigrants in Israel.110 Butler ’ s essay summons Weil ’ s contemporary Hannah Arendt , another Jewish philosopher who “ made clear in her early writings , Jewishness is not always the same as Judaism . And , as she made clear in her evolving political position on the state of Israel , neither Judaism nor Jewishness necessarily leads to the embrace of Zionism. ” 111 Unsurprisingly , her position on Zionism led to harsh criticisms and even ad hominem attacks from her fellow Jewish community members ; as Butler notes , Gershom Scholem went so far as to question Arendt ’ s Jewishness.112 Ironically , it is this very gesture—taking it upon oneself to choose who is and is not to count or live among us—that Arendt observed at the trial of Adolf Eichmann and toward which she directed her philosophical critiques . “ According to Arendt , ” Butler writes , “ Eichmann thought that he and his superiors might choose with whom to cohabit the earth and failed to realize that the heterogeneity of the earth ’ s population is an irreversible condition of social and political life itself. ” 113 The Nazis decided that Jews , homosexuals , gypsies , and others did not fit within their idealized society and eugenic aspirations and , hence , set out to exclude ( anathema sit ) them once and for all . Judaism , Butler argues , provides a direct yet paradoxical response to such exclusivist enterprises , including , she adds , Zionism . Judaic ethics require the suspension of the principle of identity , according to Butler . As she explains , “ [ W ] ithin several ethical frameworks , Jewishness is itself an anti-identitarian project insofar as we might even say that being a Jew implies taking up an ethical relation to the non-Jew. ” 114 The ethical imperative is cohabitation . To face the other is to give full consent to the other ’ s alterity . An equivalent to this ethical imperative is found in Weil ’ s understanding of friendship . Or , as Levinas writes , “ To love one ’ s neighbor can mean already to glimpse his mastery over us , and the dignity he has as someone who is associated with God and has rights over us. ” 115 Accepting the other as other displaces self-privilege , or egoistic desire . As Butler writes , . . . we must actively preserve the nonchosen character of inclusive and plural cohabitation : we not only live with those we never chose , and to whom we may feel no social sense of belonging , but we are also obligated to preserve those lives and the plurality of which they form a part . . . . To cohabit the earth is prior to any possible community or nation or neighborhood . We might choose where to live , and who to live by , but we can not choose with whom to cohabit the earth.116 No person or group warrants special preference over and above others , yet alone at the expense of others . The paradox of the principle of Jewish identity being anti-identitarian as expounded by Butler coincides with Weil ’ s ethics . As such , we propose that Butler ’ s paradox is a corrective to the internal contradictions within Weil ’ s oeuvre , as evidenced by her selective advocacy of anathema sit , as well as her outright caustic remarks about Judaism and Islam . It functions as such by evoking and then emphasizing the most prescient ideas in Weil ’ s thought—albeit Butler arrives at the problems from a different direction—to a degree that prohibits the transgression of the paradox itself . To begin , Weil likewise acknowledges necessity ( or , our external limits ) , whereas in Butler ’ s terms as stated above , it is “ to realize that the heterogeneity of the earth ’ s population is an irreversible condition of social and political life itself. ” On these very grounds , Weil rebuked the Church and European colonialism for attempting to and at times succeeding in eradicating non-Christian , non-European cultures . Weil , as we will describe in the next chapter , singles out selfish desire and the imagination as the root of evil . Self-identity and by extension collective-identity reify our imagined selves , motivating a will to power . Rather than recognizing our inherent vulnerability , we tend to superimpose our imagined selves over and against the world and others—the euphemistic collateral damage of our selfish desires . In her mystical philosophy , Weil argues that we ought to be porous . As we explained in the first chapter , both philosophy and mysticism are the preparations for death ( of ego ) . The preparation means refraining from exercising our will to power . This , in turn , ultimately entails remaining detached , and renouncing our individual and collective identities . In short , Weil ’ s ethics are anti-identitarian . We think it fitting to set ourselves and Weil aside and leave the last words on this topic to Butler : We are outside ourselves , before ourselves , and only in such a mode is there a chance of being for another . We are , to be sure , already in the hands of the other before we make any decision about with whom we choose to live . This way of being bound to one another is precisely not a social bond that is entered into through volition and deliberation ; it precedes contract , is mired in dependency , and is often effaced by those forms of social contract that depend on an ontology of volitional individuality . Thus it is , even from the start , to the stranger that we are bound , the one , or the ones , we never knew and never chose . If we accept this sort of ontological condition , then to destroy the other is to destroy my life , that sense of my life that is invariably social life.117 3Human nature and decreation The Pharisee , standing by himself , was praying thus , “ God , I thank you that I am not like other people : thieves , rogues , adulterers , or even like this tax collector . I fast twice a week ; I give a tenth of all my income. ” But the tax collector , standing far off , would not even look up to heaven , but was beating his breast and saying , “ God , be merciful to me , a sinner ! ” I tell you , this man went down to his home justified rather than the other ; for all who exalt themselves will be humbled , but all who humble themselves will be exalted . LUKE 18:11–14 Few speak humbly of humility , chastely of chastity , dubiously of skepticism . We are nothing but lies , duplicity , contradiction , and we hide and disguise ourselves from ourselves . BLAISE PASCAL1 In the beginning—Creation The previous two chapters have explored the paradoxes of Simone Weil ’ s explicitly religious thought . Underlying her atheology with its Christian interpretations is a set of assumptions about human nature . Although she never systematically outlines a metaphysics of humanity , it is possible to find consistency in her descriptions of human proclivities and constitutions scattered throughout her Notebooks . These natural dispositions are one part and inevitable result of the act of creation , which consists of supernatural self-withdrawal to permit something else to exist ; creation is both the act of divine renunciation and the name for this other existence that includes human beings . At the same time , Weil contends that we are to give up the conceits , privileges , and illusions of self-sufficiency that accompany our created status . That is , she sets forth religio-ethical prescriptions that directly challenge our natural tendencies ; we are to return the nature that attends our creation by a process she calls decreation . In what follows , we detail the contours of Weil ’ s concepts of creation , the resultant human nature , the related source of evil , and , finally , redemption by decreation . In view of these discussions , we hope to shed light on the inherent paradox that characterizes an individual ’ s struggle for ethical innocence in a world governed by forces of moral gravity . As we have seen , there are aspects of Simone Weil ’ s religious thought that appear more like a systematic theology than a mystery-laden atheology . Her writings on the creation of the universe arguably fall under the former category or at least suggest a more formal cosmological view than would be expected from a negative theologian and mystic . It is also by way of these descriptions that we find a particular quality of the divine emerging ; for Weil , in these accounts , what defines “ the true God ” is God ’ s love or the refusal to exercise power everywhere.2 God ’ s creation , she writes , “ is an act of love and it is perpetual . At each moment our existence is God ’ s love for us. ” 3 In creating us , however , God renounced being everything and forewent commanding everywhere he had the power to do so . That is , God consented to withdrawing from being all to permit existence independent of him . For Weil , this consent to and recognition of the independent existence of another is nothing other than the meaning of love . She described creation as an act of love in this way : On God ’ s part creation is not an act of self-expansion but of restraint and renunciation . God and all his creatures are less than God alone . God accepted this diminution . He emptied a part of his being from himself . . . God permitted the existence of things distinct from himself and worth infinitely less than himself . By this creative act he denied himself , as Christ has told us to deny ourselves . God denied himself for our sakes in order to give us the possibility of denying ourselves for him . This response , this echo , which it is in our power to refuse , is the only possible justification for the folly of love of the creative act.4 While our “ echo ” to God ’ s creation will be discussed at length in the last section of this chapter , for the present , it is imperative to grasp the Christian interpretation at hand in Weil ’ s remarks above . God ’ s self-denial has at least two facets : the act of creation and Christ ’ s kenotic existence , wherein divine omnipotence is surrendered for the sake of experiencing human pathos . But God ’ s self-emptying is not restricted to two discrete events in time ; as Weil notes , our continued existence is proof that creation , as love , is “ perpetual. ” Our freedom to exist outside of God ’ s will and power is , paradoxically , due to God ’ s ongoing generosity . In the love of creation , God withdrew , and this act provided us not only with our very existence , but also gave us the ability to love him in return , according to Weil . However , by virtue of God ’ s withdrawal , God is not present here below as a direct object of our love . In her Notebooks we find : “ The drawing closer together of God and man is prohibited by the very nature of creation , by the gulf separating being from appearance. ” 5 This distance is also required for love . As she explains elsewhere , For if we were exposed to the direct radiance of his love , without the protection of space , of time , and of matter , we should be evaporated like water in the sun ; there would not be enough “ I ” in us to make it possible to surrender the “ I ” for love ’ s sake.6 Such consent to God ’ s own absence , or to a distance , is the essence of the purest love possible for a human , according to Weil . The sign of this love would be an insatiable yearning for the super-natural ( the good ) , a hungering that is not falsely sated by relative or natural goods such as political solutions , relationships , or material possessions . Thus , this love would have no object , as such , for it would be directed toward an elemental absence—a void . In addition , our love must imitate the love of God , by being constituted by self-renunciation for the sake of the free existence of others . This is why love is also understood as “ belief in the existence of other human beings as such. ” 7 When we love something purely , we desire only that it should exist and be part of creation ; we do not wish to change or modify a beloved , for instance , nor do we wish to assume power over or possess a beloved by eradicating the distance between distinct beings . It is in the same way that God ’ s creation was an act of love , pure consent to distance , pure consent to our existence . And yet Weil recognizes that the act of creation also entails a cruel irony : the withdrawal of God means license in human willing , but this freedom is qualified and conditioned by natural forces that result from the vacuum left by God . Weil writes , “ Thus the existence of evil here below , far from disproving the reality of God , is the very thing that reveals him in his truth. ” 8 Our existence , in other words , is of necessity plagued by the absence of pure goodness ; what we humans can accomplish by our own powers , desires , and wills can only be relatively good , as the source of real goodness is not in us , but external to us . Thus , our plane of existence is essentially constituted by emptiness of the good , and consequently , as we have mentioned , a yearning for that good , which we lack . On an individual level , too , we are constituted by this void of perfection and goodness ; to be created means to be empty and to be hungry for union with God , or with truth , goodness , and beauty . But our necessary distance from God permits a forgetfulness of this essential void and a tendency to seek any sort of palliative for this hunger . Human nature—The void We need to take a step back here to grasp the crucial notion of “ the void ” ( le vide ) in Weil ’ s thought . According to Weil , “ void ” is constitutive of our true nature and is experienced as asymmetry , insatiable hunger , lack of equilibrium , or vacuum , but we continually attempt to escape that experience by positing or appropriating various fillers . She continually reminds us that “ man ’ s misery consists in the fact that he is not God . He is continually forgetting this. ” 9 This forgetfulness is not just the result of a poor memory , however . Our created state characterized by incompletion , mortality , and privation of real good is practically unbearable without compensatory thoughts , at the very least . Since unpleasant situations tend to recall to us this unbalanced nature , the faculty of the imagination is always at work , building up a false sense of stability , and with it , a false ego . For instance , Weil tells us , “ Like a gas , the soul tends to fill the entire space which is given it , ” but “ not to exercise all the power at one ’ s disposal is to endure the [ given ] void . This is contrary to all the laws of nature. ” 10 We should note Weil ’ s articulation of the given emptiness of the human soul and the soul ’ s own natural proclivity ( through the imagination ) to fill in that space . To leave the emptiness intact by renouncing the workings of the imagination , or to maintain the hunger , feels and is unnatural . But in Weil ’ s religio-ethical thought , this maintenance of the void is precisely what is required , for attempts to fill the void are nothing other than the roots of evil . Psychology tells us that experiences of emotional imbalance , mental suffering , depression , and in general , those states that Weil would classify as the natural effects of our created status , are to be addressed and resolved for the sake of mental “ health. ” Psychical equilibrium is the goal . We hear this message not only from the practices of psychology and psychoanalysis , but also from our contemporary Western self-help culture that has superficially appropriated many of the findings from these disciplines.11 Not surprisingly , Weil herself was very critical of Sigmund Freud , especially of his contention that universal or religious love is simply aim-inhibited and sublimated erotic libido , but she did agree with Freud that “ any object whatsoever . . . can become an object of desire. ” 12 For instance , what Freud demonstrated by his theories of the pleasure principle , and more importantly , through its deferral by the reality principle , is the phenomenon by which the human psyche strives for what he called “ constancy , ” or a plateau of regulated stimulation . In his theory , our drives—that is , our libidinal and aggressive drives—seek external and internal satisfaction that is characterized by conservatism . In other words , according to Freud , our perpetual searches for satisfaction have more to do with avoiding tension and the displeasure of excessive stimulation than they do with chasing novel and positive pleasures . Due to this conservative tendency , he argued , the libido tends to be narcissistic , returning to the ego , as if by a strong gravitational pull . For this reason , the ego , eager to appease its drives and to reduce the stimulation it receives from the external world , seeks to appropriate its love-objects as part of its identity . However , if they show resistance to such identification , the ego becomes either sadistic toward those objects , or masochistic toward itself as an object.13 In any case , Freud presents us with an image of a psyche that will not withstand the displeasure of tension ; energy that must be displaced from one ( forbidden or unavailable ) object to another ( more convenient ) object is “ desexualized libido , ” or “ sublimated energy. ” 14 Such a process occurs to avoid real frustration that issues from an encounter with the external world and explains , in his view , phenomena like appreciation of art and religious devotion . But in Freud ’ s metapsychology , the drives that are constitutive of the human are never permanently satisfied ; human existence is marred by a never-ending process of managing these energies in negotiations with the external world . He describes our essential situation in Civilization and Its Discontents : Life , as we find it , is too hard for us ; it brings us too many pains , disappointments , and impossible tasks . In order to bear it we can not dispense with palliative measures . . . There are perhaps three such measures : powerful deflections , which cause us to make light of our misery ; substitutive satisfactions , which diminish it ; and intoxicating substances , which make us insensitive to it . Something of the kind is indispensable.15 To put his assessment in Weil ’ s terminology : humans require void-fillers . It would be absurd ( and neurotic ) to forego the consolations afforded by fantasies and distractions , which , after all , make civilization possible . Moreover , we yearn for constancy and equilibrium , an ultimately “ inorganic state ” that Freud also interprets as the origin of those drives and that evidences our essential “ need to restore an earlier state of things. ” 16 For Weil , however , the inevitable tension and lack of equilibrium that characterizes human life is itself due to an earlier state of things . As we have said , insofar as our existence is the result of the withdrawal of pure goodness , we have necessarily inherited that vacuum , which manifests itself as a longing or desire for the good . Aristophanes ’ account of the origin of desire , as it appears in Plato ’ s Symposium , may serve as a helpful illustration here . According to the myth , originally we were spherical beings with two heads , four arms , four legs , and so on , who became so hubristic that we rolled right up Mount Olympus in a challenge to the gods . As a result , Zeus decided to cut us in two , which caused these now-partial beings to roam the earth , looking and yearning for their other half.17 This splitting appears to explain the origin of desire ( or the “ void ” ) and , hence , human nature . However , there is something telling in the original challenge to the gods that is often taken for granted . As Anne Carson points out , Aristophanes ’ judgment ( [ that ] “ no lover could want anything else ” [ than eternal oneness ] ) is belied by the anthropology of his own myth . Was it the case that the round beings of his fantasy remained perfectly content rolling about the world in prelapsarian oneness ? No . They got big ideas and started rolling toward Olympus to make an attempt on the gods ( 190b–c ) . They began reaching for something else . So much for oneness.18 In this significant interpretation , even the “ earlier state of things ” as original unity does not preclude a longing for something else . Indeed , Weil ’ s cosmology does not suggest any primeval wholeness that was ours . But our very beings are partial , finite , and therefore constituted by desire because we are created ; that is , we are the products of love and are destined to love—in the sense of the Greek eros , which denotes lack and a reaching for what we do not have . Thus , Weil affirms Diotima ’ s correction of Aristophanes : Now there is a certain story . . . according to which lovers are those people who seek their other halves . But according to my story , a lover does not seek the half or the whole , unless , my friend , it turns out to be good as well . . . That ’ s because what everyone loves is really nothing other than the good.19 So the original desire for the good , in order to remain vital , entails endurance of the void that carries with it a feeling of imbalance or asymmetry and necessarily involves suffering—a prescription contrary to those “ pragmatic ” recommendations of psychology and psychiatry . Indeed , as Iris Murdoch , a scholar and admirer of Weil , described , the void is “ the anguished experience of lack of balance . We have been unjustly treated , insulted , humiliated : we want to get our own back , to get even , if need be to hurt innocent people as we have been hurt. ” 20 But that lack of balance is essential because it is what makes us conscious of our disposition with relation to reality , namely , that we are not God ( or the good ) . In a statement that captures this fact via her unique atheology , Weil writes , “ We can only know one thing about God : that he is what we are not . Our misery alone is the image of this . The more we contemplate it , the more we contemplate Him. ” 21 This is why loving truth means enduring the void and refusing the deflections , substitutive satisfactions , and intoxications Freud described . To gravitate toward and make use of those compensations as a means to establish equilibrium for oneself is , as Weil put it , “ bad because it is imaginary. ” 22 Because in Weil ’ s understanding , humans are constituted by void and are continually “ hungry , ” we grasp for consolations that will provide the illusion of being “ full ” and complete . Not surprisingly , then , we frequently lose consciousness of our void altogether ( and thereby our proper position in relation to the universe ) , and this negligence is further reinforced by earthly successes and privileges . ( It is thus harder for those more prosperous to recall their true nature as finite , created beings than for the materially poor and afflicted . ) Mere complacency , negligence , and forgetfulness may sometimes be the culprits for our turn toward baseness , but more often than not , rewards are greedily sought out and accepted , burdens are displaced on others , suffering is intentionally deflected , revenge is enacted , grudges are clung to , and distractions are welcomed—in short , the void is actively covered over and disguised . In all such cases and numerous others , we have negation of void—a-voidance—and the hasty workings of what Weil called l ’ imagination combleuse , the filling imagination , the source of all evil . Comfortable illusions—Evil In her letter to an injured soldier , Joë Bousquet , in May 1942 , Weil confessed , I believe that the root of evil , in everybody perhaps , but certainly in those whom affliction has touched and above all if the affliction is biological , is day-dreaming . It is the sole consolation , the unique resource of the afflicted ; the one solace to help them bear the fearful burden of time ; and a very innocent one , besides being indispensable . So how could it be possible to renounce it ? It has only one disadvantage , which is that it is unreal.23 It is perhaps astounding that an activity as seemingly innocuous as reverie should be called “ the root of evil. ” Even Weil acknowledged—paradoxically—that it is an “ innocent ” consolation for the afflicted , who are desperate for any reprieve whatsoever from their overwhelming and excruciating suffering . However , as she also indicates , the problem with daydreaming is that it is “ unreal , ” escapist . More generally , l ’ imagination combleuse , for her , is not only inherently distracting , but it is also destructive and a “ liar ” because it flattens phenomena into two dimensions and conveniently conceals the relations between events.24 This is the sort of imagination that is more closely associated with fantasy than with inspired and creative thinking about real problems . We know that Weil was influenced by Blaise Pascal in this regard , and it is likely that in his discussion of “ diversion , ” we find the germ of what was to become her notion of l ’ imagination combleuse . For instance , in the Pensées , he writes : Being unable to cure death , wretchedness and ignorance , men have decided , in order to be happy , not to think about such things . . . The only good thing for men therefore is to be diverted from thinking of what they are , either by some occupation which takes their mind off it , or by some novel and agreeable passion which keeps them busy , like gambling , hunting , some absorbing show , in short by what is called diversion.25 Such a description has much in common with her statement that “ the thought of death calls for a counterweight , and this counterweight—apart from grace— can not be anything but a lie , ” wherein this counterweight is a reference to the imagination , the “ filler of the void. ” 26 As a mental faculty , the imagination accurately captures most of our waking life so that we may a-void , that is , negate the feeling of emptiness that inevitably manifests itself in our being . Thus , we are masters of a-voiding ( reality ) by imaginarily “ filling ” the emptiness that constitutes our true being as finite creatures . But Weil describes this movement as a mechanical process , analogous to the laws of physical gravity ( la pesanteur ) , such that we are naturally prone to and pulled toward distractedness and fantasy . But this fact does not relieve us from a moral responsibility to resist that gravity . In the same way that many Christian theologians have argued that we must overcome our “ original sin , ” Weil thinks we must not give in to the moral baseness that characterizes the force of gravity . She writes , “ Obedience to the force of gravity . The greatest sin. ” 27 It is , however , natural that the likelihood of a-voidance is at its highest when one is reminded ( through suffering ) of one ’ s inherent finitude or disequilibrium , and in particular , after one has gotten accustomed to those comforts and luxuries that have negated the sense of void . Recall that according to Weil , when we suffer , we almost always attempt to establish “ equilibrium ” by deflecting the suffering back onto the world . Sometimes these deflections take the form of revenge ; sometimes they take the form of an imaginary reward for the suffering . In all cases , these deflective consolations are anesthetic distractions that constitute evil . Weil herself confesses , “ I must not forget that at certain times when my headaches were raging I had an intense longing to make another human being suffer by hitting him in exactly the same part of his forehead. ” 28 We are reminded , too , of Rilke ’ s verses : Defiance . The child bent becomes the bender , inflicts on others what he once went through . Loved , feared , rescuer , wrestler , victor , he takes his vengeance , blow by blow.29 Weil expands upon her statement : “ The search for equilibrium is bad because it is imaginary ” by warning us about the temptation of vengeance . “ Revenge . Even if in fact we kill or torture our enemy it is , in a sense , imaginary. ” 30 Needless to say , it is not the destruction in such violence that is imaginary , but rather , the sense that equilibrium has been truly established is fictional . As Iris Murdoch has written , “ We console ourselves with fantasies of ‘ bouncing back , ’ ” but “ we must hold on to what has really happened and not cover it with imagining how we are to unhappen it . Void makes loss a reality. ” 31 The loss exists , is real , and can not be dissipated by whatever form of repayment or revenge . Moreover , given that the void is the essence of human nature , our sufferings may be viewed as signs pointing to our necessary status as created beings . This is what Weil means when she writes , “ We do not have to acquire humility . There is humility in us—only we humiliate ourselves before false gods. ” 32 The “ false gods ” in question here include social power , prestige , individual pride , and collective approbation . Our struggles , our sufferings , and especially affliction ( malheur ) , when experienced , reveal our inherent mediocrity , incompleteness , and humility ( not as a virtue , but as the essence of our being ) . Predictably , this constitution is susceptible to a continuous stream of distractions that are either sought out or created . Pascal understood this : That is why men are so fond of hustle and bustle ; that is why prison is such a fearful punishment ; that is why the pleasures of solitude are so incomprehensible . That , in fact , is the main joy of being a king , because people are continually trying to divert him and procure him every kind of pleasure . A king is surrounded by people whose only thought is to divert him and stop him thinking about himself , because , king though he is , he becomes unhappy as soon as he thinks about himself . . . Thus men who are naturally conscious of what they are shun nothing so much as rest ; they would do anything to be disturbed.33 Hence , even , and especially , a king contends with the illusion of a masterful self and would do anything to preserve that illusion . In sum , it is the deflection of suffering that comes from confrontation with reality—the attempt to push it off on the world—which is the essence of evil . It consists in the refusal to acknowledge our own limits as finite beings , as well as the limits of others . Evil may have the character of outright sadism ( taking pleasure in provoking the pain of others ) , or it may take the form of cultivated indifference ( where others are simply not seen or heard ) . Of these forms , Weil notes : These two states of mind are closer than they appear to be . The second is only a weaker mode of the first ; its deafness is complacently cultivated because it is agreeable and it offers a positive satisfaction of its own . There are no other restraints upon our will than material necessity and the existence of other human beings around us . Any imaginary extension of these limits is seductive , so there is a seduction in whatever helps us to forget the reality of the obstacles.34 So while daydreaming at first glance appears benign , it fosters the construction of a character who perceives no boundaries , even when those boundaries are the edges of human lives and projects . Complete license is certainly seductive to anyone , but it necessarily “ empt [ ies ] human lives of their reality and seem [ s ] to turn people into puppets. ” 35 Therefore , Weil , like Plato , connects injustice with falsehood and appearances . The imperative to seek truth is always an ethical one , at base . Frequently , as we have noted , the consoling and self-expanding imagination functions in response to harm received ( whether actual or perceived ) . But here , too , there is fictionalizing ; as Weil describes it , we have only “ filled an emptiness in ourselves by creating one in somebody else. ” 36 In order that we may not be guilty of evil , then , it is necessary that we allow ourselves to be penetrated by the reality of the world , refusing the temptations of temporary consolation that would be provided by seeking ( an inherently imaginary ) equilibrium . It is imperative that we not a-void . One of the cruel ironies here is that while it is deflection of suffering that defines evil , the deflector is immune to its effects . Hence , Weil writes : The sensitivity of the innocent victim who suffers is like felt crime . True crime can not be felt . The innocent victim who suffers knows the truth about his executioner , the executioner does not know it . The evil which the innocent victim feels in himself is in his executioner , but he is not sensible of the fact . The innocent victim can only know the evil in the shape of suffering . That which is not felt by the criminal is his own crime . That which is not felt by the innocent victim is his own innocence . It is the innocent victim who can feel hell.37 Beyond this excerpt being a description of the nature of evil , we should also view it as a prescription for how to deal with suffering and even as a sense of our own degradation . She further advises , “ The crime which is latent in us we must inflict on ourselves , ” for “ a hurtful act is the transference to others of the degradation which we bear in ourselves. ” 38 We must never regard such a transference as a deliverance from evil , for “ evil is not diminished but increased in him from whom it proceeds. ” 39 Instead , when we refuse to transfer our degradation and crime to others—and thereby “ inflict ” it on ourselves—a real transformation takes place . The evil is transmuted into our own ( redemptive ) suffering and effectively stills the force of violence that otherwise would be replicated as the contagion of sin . In the same way , the tendency toward a-voidance is nourished and expanded each time we do not change the latent crime in us to pure suffering ; the imagination expands and becomes more and more difficult to harness . What is produced from this “ filling imagination , ” however , is not art , novelty , beauty , or genius—evil , it turns out , is completely mundane.40 Evil , contrary to public opinion and the manner in which crimes are presented by the media , is literally nothing new . According to Weil , it is simplistic and superficial . “ Evil is license and that is why it is monotonous : everything has to be drawn from ourselves , ” she explains.41 As we will describe in the next section , it is not given to humans to create except through decreation , so evil is always “ a bad attempt to imitate God. ” 42 Any such attempt , then , reveals the perpetrator acting in the realm of the imaginary : he acts to obtain something that is illusory ( for it can never actually deliver him from his void , as he believes ) , and what he thinks himself to be is false ( for he is not creative , but created ) . So while imaginary evil is romantic and varied , real evil is gloomy , monotonous , barren , boring . Imaginary good is boring ; real good is always new , marvelous , intoxicating . . . Evil is multifarious and fragmentary , good is one ; evil is apparent , good is mysterious ; evil consists in action , good in non-action , in activity which does not act , etc.43 It seems counterintuitive that goodness , deriving from “ activity which does not act , ” would be more “ intoxicating ” than assertive , multifarious evil . But allowing the imagination to dwell on what is evil “ implies a certain cowardice , ” for in doing so , “ we hope to enjoy , to know , and to grow through what is unreal , ” Weil asserts.44 Additionally , to dwell on evil ( by daydreaming of a limitless self ) is already to commit oneself to it ; reverie , here , is considered action . She writes , “ We believe that thought does not commit us in any way , but it alone commits us , and license of thought includes all license. ” 45 From this statement , we can see the imperative of correct orientation , for we necessarily commit ourselves to unreality ( and hence evil ) when we place ultimate value on mental and emotional equilibrium . “ Gravity ” ( la pesanteur ) —while not equivalent with Weil ’ s notion of evil46—does capture the nearly irresistible pull toward actions and fantasies that generate the semblance of homeostasis and themselves constitute evil . True , we sometimes submit almost unconsciously to gravity ; we can “ fall ” into evil by negligence and inattentiveness , just as we can easily fall prey to propaganda . However , there is always the original consent to l ’ imagination combleuse . Our freedom is significant because of the choice of orientation in relation to the void : Will we impatiently deny that we are hungry for the good and resort to ersatz fillers or recognize and embrace the hunger for the good ? As Weil wrote to Bousquet , the problem with daydreaming , as inoffensive as it seems , is that “ it excludes love. ” 47 Love demands reality , which necessitates consent to void and to suffering . Clearly , then , “ one does not fall into good , ” for true goodness and love imply attention to the abyss.48 But what precisely is this goodness of which we are capable ? And in truth , if we are defined by what God ( the good ) is not , how , in any sense , are we capable of good ? Returning the gift—Decreation As we have argued , and as Miklos Vetö has contended , “ The basic vision of Weil ’ s metaphysics is the sinful condition of humanity. ” 49 This condition extends itself as an imperative for a certain manner of being oriented in the world . We have been describing this orientation in various ways thus far , including : enduring the void , transmuting latent crime into suffering , being attentive , and renouncing the filling imagination , among others . For Weil , all these particular prescriptions fall under a specific and revolutionary posture for humanity : we are to be decreated . “ Decreated : to make something created pass into the uncreated , ” she tells us.50 But what is “ the uncreated ” ? Although Weil denies that decreation has anything to do with “ destruction , ” and in fact , contends that the latter is only a “ blameworthy substitute ” for the former , the formula appears to suggest depriving ( or returning ? ) the very being of something . To become “ uncreated , ” especially in terms of our constructions of identity , requires performing a critical genealogy of those notions and forms of identity in a way that would denaturalize them and render them ambiguous and relational , so that the “ I ” would be decentered . But to make “ something created pass into nothingness ” 51—which is what distinguishes destruction from decreation—requires an active self-punishing by dint of the will and can maintain , in this way , the illusion of the autonomous agent , and produce masochism rather than reflect true humility . This distinction is important , for the reflective undoing implied in decreation precludes the managerial activity characteristic of destruction ( and the sort of self-control that has been hailed for some time ) . Genuine self-renunciation is , for example , a remembrance of our utter dependency and vulnerability as created beings . It was for this reason that Weil wrote , “ There are but two moments of nakedness and perfect purity in human life—birth and death. ” 52 To understand this prescription for decentering better , we must again reflect on the void that characterizes human nature . As we are imperfect and finite , real goodness , Weil argues , can not originate in us and therefore can not be willed by us . Nevertheless , paradoxically , we can be vehicles for the good , and this possibility requires an extraordinary amount of effort and patience—though Weil will characterize it as “ negative ” effort.53 The only manner in which we can “ contribute ” goodness to existence is by a withdrawal and renunciation of our egoistic tendencies , including , crucially , l ’ imagination combleuse . This refusal to project our selves onto the world , signaling the decision to consent to the void , is decreation . This is because , in Weil ’ s metaphysics , We possess nothing in the world—a mere chance can strip us of everything—except the power to say “ I. ” That is what we have to give to God , in other words , to destroy . There is absolutely no other free act which it is given us to accomplish , only the destruction of the “ I. ” 54 For Weil , it is the gift from the Creator to refuse the divine parent and all that is associated with that being . We are always already and necessarily at a distance from God , but our freedom consists in deciding an orientation toward the supernatural ( grace ) or away from it ( gravity ) . The “ power to say ‘ I ’ ” is indicative of the self-assertive orientation , the insistence on existing as if we are gods ourselves and thus lacking nothing . Ironically , this self-assertive orientation that pretends goodness derives from the “ I ” is only the orientation to gravity , by which our subsequent words , thoughts , and actions are predictable , unoriginal , self-serving , and cliché—all trademarks of behaviors that are not truly free . It is thus that “ love is a sign of our wretchedness , ” as Weil contends , for love is by nature an implication of our conscious separation from and lack of God ( or the good ) .55 What should be done with our existence , then , particularly if we wish to model ourselves after the origin of love and the definition of good ? What it would mean to imitate God , to approximate genuine creativity , would be to imitate the renunciation of God , except that whereas God renounced being everything , “ we should renounce being something . That , ” Weil insists , “ is our only good. ” 56 Decreation is our only ( negative ) means to creating something beautiful , analogous to wiping dust off a window so light may shine through ; it is when we actively impose our interests , desires , and personalities in the intention to create that we actually end up destroying . Weil likens us to possessing “ an imaginary divinity ” that has been given to us since birth , so that we may strip ourselves of it , just “ as Christ did of his real divinity. ” 57 When we cling to the “ I ” and refuse to give up this false divinity ( convincing ourselves that it is real ) , we contaminate the scene by the distractions and the contagion of evil that attend the assertion of ego ; our parochialism and narrowness blinds us to the reality of the external world and of others . Our actions should not be characterized by attempts to create , or add to the world that is , from our own limited designs . To do so reveals our tendency to believe that truth ( goodness ) can come from partial and limited beings . Such is not the case . “ Creation ( or manifestation ) , ” she says , “ is the act of God ; preservation that of man. ” 58 Therefore , “ we must become nothing , we must go down to the vegetative level ; it is then that God becomes bread. ” 59 Therefore , in relation to our existence as created , we should be ingrates , for we make a mistake when we accept the gift of being ( turned away from God ) . This acceptance is “ bad and fatal , ” and the gift ’ s virtue “ becomes apparent through my refusal of it , ” for “ the self is only the shadow which sin and error cast by stopping the light of God. ” And Weil continues , referencing Plato ’ s cave allegory , “ I take this shadow for a being. ” 60 This mistake being morally fatal , it is better to think of ourselves as vehicles , or transparencies , through which pure love and goodness may pass to others . This obligation may appear to be one of passivity , but the renunciation of one ’ s self is the most difficult posture to adopt and is ironically one of the most socially subversive and threatening to the status quo . In her Notebooks , Weil references an untitled story demonstrating this effect of decreation : “ Story . ‘ There was once a man who became wise . He learnt how to no longer make a single gesture or take a single step which were not useful . Shortly afterwards , they shut him up. ’ ” 61 How strange that one who acts and speaks so economically—sparsely , that is—should be perceived as so loud and dangerous that he would be censored . This extreme vigilance to rein in what is superfluous and excessive in the interest of a more productive and creative silence illuminates genuine noise and spectacle for what it is . In our natural state , we would much prefer the clamor . Our religio-ethical duty by virtue of our created status , is to be an ingrate in reference to the gift to exist outside of God—to decreate . Decreation manifests the humility that is already in us by nature , but that we had avoided for the sake of a false divinity . Humility consists , at least in part , in knowing the ego has no energy of its own to create anything of real value . But characterizing it as “ the queen of virtues , ” Weil also states humility is “ the refusal to exist outside of God , ” 62 despite the fact that God gives us the possibility to maintain that separation and the illusions that attend it . Humility , like true goodness , can not be intended or willed . Rather , they entirely elude the will and may be considered as effects of a previously decided orientation . Even actions and words that may be classified as “ just ” are done and spoken almost in spite of ourselves . We do not predict their manifestation , as our place is to be the obedient intermediary between the “ impossible ” good and the world , subject to necessity . For this reason , the good that arrives via our decreation is unexpected and immensely interesting . Weil offers a metaphor : A man coming down a ladder , who misses a step and falls , is either a sad or an uninteresting sight , even the first time we see it . But if a man were walking in the sky as though it were a ladder , going up into the clouds and coming down again , he could do it every hour of every day and we would never be tired of watching . It is the same with pure good ; for a necessity as strong as gravity condemns man to evil and forbids him any good.63 Gravity ( physical and moral ) is , in other words , natural and expected . But the transcendence of this gravity is compelling . For Weil , this goodness is not merely the opposite of evil , for this would put them on the same ( natural ) level . Instead , she tells us , “ Good is essentially other than evil , ” in the same way that supernatural justice is essentially other than the natural conception of justice , not a contrary.64 Weil explains further : That which is the direct opposite of an evil never belongs to the order of higher good . It is often scarcely any higher than evil ! Examples : theft and the bourgeois respect for property ; adultery and the “ respectable woman ” ; the savings bank and waste ; lying and “ sincerity. ” 65 These so-called goods such as respect for property , the savings bank , and sincerity are forms of what Weil terms “ degraded good. ” They are the relative goods—on the same level as democracy , capitalism , and religious institutions—all of which easily become idols for people who have no patience for what is not naturally possible and under their control . However , only such degraded good is capable of being actually violated by evil , and in this sense , degraded good is evil . We must renounce it as we must renounce ordinary evil , while being mindful that this inferior , relative good is much more difficult to resist than what we typically term “ evil , ” according to Weil , perhaps because prestige and social consideration accompany the former . Real goodness , however , is “ an unfathomable marvel ” that is too often desecrated at the hands of novelists and artists who render it cliché and portray evil as sensational and mysterious . We “ envelop [ the truth of the Good ] in a fog in which , as in all fiction , values are reversed , so that evil is attractive and good is tedious , ” 66 when in fact , “ nothing is so beautiful and wonderful , nothing is so continually fresh and surprising , so full of sweet and perpetual ecstasy , as the good. ” 67 This is because the forms and manifestations of baseness are finite , for they issue from the finite ( i.e. , from us ) . We can not , as Weil has said , pull ourselves up by our own bootstraps . So the artist , if she is to create something that can be called “ beautiful ” or “ good , ” must take on “ the transparency of a window pane ” to allow the light of the divine to shine through.68 This is because “ matter is not beautiful when it obeys man , but only when it obeys God . If sometimes a work of art seems almost as beautiful as the sea , the mountains , or flowers , it is because the light of God has filled the artist. ” 69 As the divine creates , so must we decreate , according to Weil . There is harmony in this imitation , not struggle or contest , for the decreated orientation gives primacy to inspiration in human existence and , most significantly , makes love possible . 4Love and detachment No man can serve two masters ; for a slave will either hate the one and love the other , or be devoted to the one and despise the other . You can not serve God and wealth . MATTHEW 6:24 Love undefeated in the fight , Love that makes havoc of possessions , Love who lives at night in a young girl ’ s soft cheeks , Who travels over sea , or in huts in the countryside— there is no god able to escape you nor anyone of men , whose life is a day only , and whom you possess is mad . CHORUS , ANTIGONE1 Limit of the intellect Irving Singer once noted , “ In the philosophy of love . . . I am convinced that every discussion must start with Plato. ” 2 This remark is certainly valid in the context of Simone Weil ’ s thinking on the subject of love and the related notion of philosophical detachment . We know that Weil read Plato as a spiritual thinker , a mystic even . She famously wrote , “ . . . Then what is Plato ? A mystic , the inheritor of a mystical tradition which permeated the whole of Greece. ” 3 These words point to the inseparability , for Weil , of an experiential spirituality and philosophical rigor that are oftentimes assumed to be quite distinct , if not altogether contrary to one another . It is because both are grounded in a common orientation—she names attention—that they are not at odds and , in fact , are complementary . But as with all of Weil ’ s significant ideas , there is a paradox at the base of her Platonic-Christian understanding of love . We know that for the ancient Greeks and their Christian inheritors such as Dante , St. Augustine , and Pascal , self-control was a central concern for living “ the good life , ” especially when it came to matters of the heart and flesh.4 As we will see , in fact , self-renunciation underlies the purest form of love in Weil ’ s philosophy . However , the ancients also recognized that excessive regulation of the self to the detriment of eros precluded genuine education and therefore growth—be it moral or spiritual . Weil , too , underscores the importance of spontaneous desire in the formation of attention,5 which , for her , is synonymous with love , a desire to come into greater contact with reality . Thus , there is a tension at the heart of Weilienne love that must be navigated . In the erotic pulsation that stirs her to reach for what is by definition not present but beyond perceptible edges—the absent God/the absent good—she is simultaneously performing deliberate preparations for the possible arrival , reception , and manifestation of such supernatural values . The preparatory work is the work of the will and intelligence , necessitating philosophical analysis and self-critique ; this duty is carried out by the disciplining task-master-self who , after diligently clearing the ground of egoistic projections and selfish desires , is one day overcome by an experience of love that exceeds the formerly useful intellectual categories . Weil eloquently describes this possibility : A man whose mind feels that it is captive would prefer to blind himself to the fact . But if he hates falsehood , he will not do so ; and in that case he will have to suffer a lot . He will beat his head against the wall until he faints . He will come to again and look with terror at the wall , until one day he begins afresh to beat his head against it ; and once again he will faint . And so on endlessly and without hope . One day he will wake up on the other side of the wall . Perhaps he is still in a prison , although a larger one . No matter . He has found the key ; he knows the secret which breaks down every wall . He has passed beyond what men call intelligence , into the beginning of wisdom.6 Therefore , the love of wisdom—philosophy—is simultaneously a process of self-annihilation and liberation . Weil thought that “ intelligence resides in every man , ” 7 but wisdom , whose condition ( according to Weil ) is supernatural love , is unattainable through human effort alone . Intellectual and academic exercises ultimately reach a limit in their attempts to make contact with reality , and after this point , if we have been fully committed , supernatural love characterized by “ intense , pure , disinterested , gratuitous , [ and ] generous attention ” 8 permits the light of truth to inspire all our ideas and relations . Like Plato acknowledged , the soul bitten by such love will appear foolish , absurd , and even ignoble , but this is in part because we forget that “ the best things we have come from madness [ mania ] , when it is given as a gift of the god. ” 9 Aside from pure love being a disciplined madness , another significant paradox will be apparent in our subsequent discussion . When Weil writes , for instance , that “ it is total detachment [ from the world ] that is the condition for the love of God ” 10 and thus the condition for the reception of ( supernatural ) truth and the center of Christian mysticism , we are left with the difficulty , that has long been a criticism of Plato , that such an orientation forsakes the world , its issues , and its inhabitants through an other-worldly attitude that is anything but what we would call loving . Irving Singer , for instance , remarks , The Platonic lover does not love anyone : he loves only the Good , either in abstraction or in concrete manifestations . But then . . . there is at least one kind of love that Plato ’ s philosophy neglects . That is the love of persons , the love between human beings who bestow value upon one another , each responding to the uniqueness of the other , each taking an interest in the other as a separate individual , regardless of imperfections and apart from satisfactions that also accrue . . . If Platonism fails here , its shortcoming is very great indeed.11 Singer ultimately argues that Platonism does fail on this account , precisely because the love of ideals ( which is his interpretation of Platonic love ) precludes love of particular persons . Weil ’ s own descriptions of impersonal , detached , and universal love have been called “ evil ” and “ a flight from responsibility. ” 12 In examining the interconnected Weilienne ideas of love and detachment , we must give serious consideration to these charges . Can love be both impersonal/just and interpersonal/caring ? Is universal love really an avoidance of particular humans and their needs ? If pure love is ultimately a supernatural orientation that surpasses our will and control , in what does our human responsibility lie ? ( Is ethics grounded in religion ? ) To answer these and other related concerns , this chapter proceeds in five parts . First , we explore at greater length the Greek heritage and ideas that have particular significance for Weil ’ s notion of love , especially Platonic eros and mania as read through Symposium and Phaedrus . Second , we consider the implications of losing ( self ) control in love , and the connections between this loss and decreation , in light of divine mania . Given that such decreative humility is the basis for love , in the third section , we explicate Weilienne love in detail , emphasizing it as a synonym for justice . One primary example of how loving attention is impossible given human nature but paradoxically demanded as the source of justice is in the phenomenon of affliction ( malheur ) . In the fourth section , then , we will examine the implications for attentive love , given the fact of affliction , and through this analysis , explain why detachment is necessary to love . Lastly , in the fifth section , we investigate the tensions just raised , regarding the implications of Weilienne love and the detachment it requires for interpersonal relationships . Is Weilienne love only frustrating to us who are selfishly inclined and prone to the effects of moral gravity—or is it itself a kind of evil ? Platonic eros and divine mania Arguably the two most important Platonic dialogues about love—and which have also had the most noticeable impact on Weil ’ s understanding of love—are Symposium and Phaedrus . Taken together , however , the two dialogues offer what may seem to be conflicting accounts of the philosophic ideal of love . In Symposium , love ( which becomes synonymous with the lover of wisdom or philosopher ) 13 is cool-headed , calm , and clearly oriented toward absolute beauty and goodness . Socrates exemplifies this love and the disposition it implies ; he embodies this way of life , given Plato ’ s descriptions , showing it as a possibility for humanity to emulate . But as Singer notes , in Symposium , “ Though sociable and well-mannered , Socrates is emotionally cool , unimpassioned , involved in the life about him but also at a distance from it. ” 14 His rationality and chaste demeanor are sharply contrasted to the drunken proclamations of love , sexual overtures , and physical preoccupations of Alcibiades . In Phaedrus , however , love—still understood as the philosophical spirit—is portrayed as a divine madness or mania , while the non-lover is castigated as boorish , uninspiring , and burdensome . Plato writes , “ A non-lover ’ s companionship . . . is diluted by human self-control ; all it pays are cheap , human dividends , and though the slavish attitude it engenders in a friend ’ s soul is widely praised as virtue , it tosses the soul around for nine thousand years on the earth and leads it , mindless , beneath it. ” 15 The true lover , however , “ possesses the Good by enabling the Good to take possession of him. ” 16 He has lost his own control under the influence of a radiant beauty that is reminiscent of the gods . When the lover encounters someone truly beautiful , his fearful and trembling soul , feeling itself in the presence of something divine , responds reverentially to the beloved—but in a way that looks excessive and foolish to one whose soul has not had the privilege of coming to know the divine Forms and is being rigidly monitored for the sake of self-preservation . Singer comments that we get “ an inkling of possession in the religious sense ” 17 in Plato ’ s description of the lover : A recent initiate , however , one who has seen much in heaven—when he sees a godlike face or bodily form that has captured Beauty well , first he shudders and a fear comes over him . . . then he gazes at [ the beloved ] with the reverence due a god , and if he weren ’ t afraid people would think him completely mad , he ’ d even sacrifice to his boy as if he were the image of a god . Once he has looked at him , his chill gives way to sweating and a high fever , because the stream of beauty that pours into him through his eyes warms him up and waters the growth of his wings.18 The wings—which Weil , in her Christian reading of Plato , will interpret as grace ( “ it would be impossible to state more clearly that the wing is a supernatural organ , that it is grace ” 19 ) —enable this lover eventually to make an epistemic , ethical , and aesthetic ascent until there is ( re ) union with the Absolute , the source of all beauty , truth , and goodness . This growth of wings , which is both painful and joyous , is a process that happens outside of the lover ’ s managerial will and control . The wings are divine inspiration that carry their subject to unfamiliar and unanticipated places . Though the two descriptions of love gained from Symposium and Phaedrus appear , on the surface , to contest one another , the appropriation of these ideas into Weil ’ s Christian mysticism reveals their possible congruence : the descriptions represent , not competing accounts of love but , arguably , two stages of the soul ’ s ascent toward the good . In the first stage , represented by the account given in Symposium , we learn the importance of certain refusals , as manifested by Socrates . For instance , he refuses the lusty advances of Alcibiades for the sake of his love of excellence and wisdom . He pointedly asks his suitor : “ Is this a fair exchange you propose ? You seem to me to want more than your proper share : you offer me the merest appearance of beauty , and in return you want the thing itself , ‘ gold in exchange for bronze. ’ ” 20 In this way , Socrates underscores what are erotic distractions : physical appearances , material concerns , preoccupations of the flesh . We then see love as beginning with renunciation of the common and earthly , and in many scenes in the Symposium , we find the evidence of Socrates ’ philosophic love : he is lost in thought , oblivious to weather , hunger , clothing , and his own health . This first stage is one of “ ground-clearing ” —a forceful removal of illusion , distraction , and the falsifying imagination . Weil calls this process “ training ” ( dressage ) and understands that conditioning plays a role : “ Training is based upon what are called today conditioned reflexes . By associating pleasure or pain with this or that object , new reflexes are formed which end by becoming automatic. ” 21 It is perhaps ironic that genuine love begins in the chastening of particular desires , but Weil , like Plato , understands that human nature is constituted in part by base desires that , left to their own devices , would respect no limits or reason . This is our “ animal ” nature . Hence , she continues with a vivid metaphor : [ Through training ] we can compel the animal in us to keep quiet and not interrupt when our attention is turned towards the source of grace . Circus dogs are trained with the whip and with sugar , but much more quickly and easily with the whip , and in any case sugar is not always available . So pain is the principal method.22 This operation sounds violent , and , in fact , it is . The reorientation of the soul toward the good ( or God , or grace , or truth ) implies a simultaneous turning away from the void-fillers we have previously discussed . As we have seen , this emptying/preserving of the void is painful . It is also a voluntary process , and as Weil notes , “ training is a finite operation , ” for “ the evil within us is finite like ourselves. ” 23 So we are wrong if we continue to whip the animal within us when he has already become docile because then the pains are useless exercises of asceticism and even harmful to spiritual progress . If this negative operation were the sole criterion of love , critics might be justified in calling Weil masochistic or ascetic . But if the reader will recall the previous chapter , the process of decreation was distinguished from that of “ destruction , ” because its mode of renunciation enabled its creativity by opening to the good that is outside us . Destruction has no purpose in view other than pure annihilation or sadism-masochism , whereas decreation is the manifestation of human love , exemplified by Christ on the cross . At the second stage , therefore , after we have stilled and silenced the distractions , we become truly vulnerable to possession by the good—which Weil at times calls “ grace ” —provided we maintain the orientation : [ Grace ] is something that we receive without doing anything positive ; except that we have to keep ourselves exposed towards [ it ] ; that is to say , to keep our attention oriented with love towards the good . The rest , whether painful or sweet , takes place in us without our co-operation . It is the fact of this second element which proves that it is truly a mysticism.24 Thus , in the Phaedrus , the sprouting of the wings of the lover ’ s soul and the subsequent mania are the events that happen in spite of us and our self-control . The obvious paradox is that self-disciplining is initially required for reception of the good that then subverts the whip . This is why orientation toward the good is key to this transformation ; orientation toward the methods or the rituals themselves , for instance , signify an idolatry that will result in attachment to the masterful , punishing self ( or masochism ) . As Weil puts it : “ One does not play Bach without having done scales . But neither does one play a scale merely for the sake of the scale. ” 25 Losing control and preparing to die We have argued that , for Weil , love consists in two stages wherein the will disciplines the subject ’ s base desires and falsifying imagination to bring about an orientation toward the good , which it is incapable of creating . Eventually , the will that has brought about this direction is overcome and rendered powerless by that good that is outside of its control and prediction . An important transformation occurs in this moment : the sovereign subject , who even in her self-disciplining practices had a hold on her world and herself , is deposed by the mysterious and rupturing movement of grace . ( The phenomenon of grace is described in greater detail in Chapter 6 . ) That is , the once possessive subject is possessed , but the effect of this transformation is the emergence of a radical ( non ) -subject whose protective boundaries and static identity have been troubled . It is to this issue that we now turn , for the obvious question is : How could love continue , if there is eventually no subject remaining who consents to love ? Must we not hold on to ourselves ? And , in terms of our physical bodies , aren ’ t we obliged to actively master their impulses and affects to be responsible and truly loving partners ? To explore the tensions underlying these questions , we now turn to an unexpected area of scholarship—at least , unexpected in the context of Weil ’ s religious philosophy . Recognizing that much has been written in contemporary Continental feminist philosophy about experience of controlled and disciplined embodiment , it is helpful to assess some of these insights in light of the aspect of religious love that is grounded on losing control and consenting to a porous experience of embodiment . We know that for feminists , especially , a fundamental issue of ethical and political concern is not only the cultural context that mass-produces homogenizing and digitally altered images of female beauty but also the ways in which women ’ s bodies are subsequently inscribed upon , monitored , and then read . In particular , feminists such as Sandra Lee Bartky and Susan Bordo , drawing on Michel Foucault ’ s Discipline and Punish , argue that the female body epitomizes the “ disciplined ” and “ docile ” body in its mundane daily rituals , preoccupations , and postures . Moreover , moral evaluations have been applied to the degrees of somatic control , discipline , or continence that people ( women especially ) demonstrate . There is also a recognition from these philosophers that “ self-control ” can not be divorced from the broader political institutions and the pervasive and anonymous systems of power that are unconsciously internalized so that people happily police themselves . As Foucault remarks , “ The body is also directly involved in a political field ; power relations have an immediate hold upon it ; they invest it , mark it , train it , torture it , force it to carry out tasks , to perform ceremonies , to emit signs. ” 26 Under this recognition , self-control is not so benign since it colludes with a wider system of domination , and a lack of self-control—or what Aristotle calls akrasia—begins to appear ironically as a more conscious and liberated way of being . Akrasia turns out to be surprisingly relevant to our understanding of Weilienne love , but it is negatively characterized by Aristotle as a sort of “ weakness of the will , ” an “ effeminacy , ” or in some cases , “ impetuosity. ” 27 Often widely translated as “ incontinence , ” it is generally understood to indicate a lack of self-mastery or self-control . To be afflicted with akrasia is not , for Aristotle , as shameful as being wholly vicious , for even though one committed vicious acts , they were preceded by an internal struggle to act virtuously ; akrasia is a result of poorly formed habits but with intellectual understanding of what is morally correct . ( It is no surprise that Aristotle associates akrasia/incontinence with effeminacy given the values of ancient Greek culture , but subsequently , the association of akrasia with feminine qualities has remained largely unchanged . ) But even today , beyond our philosophical heritage in which earlier figures such as Plato , Aristotle , St. Augustine , and Descartes identified the feminine with nature and nature with irrationality , unpredictability , and uncontrollability , we judge the health and continence of a physical body to be directly related to one another , and furthermore , assume a person ’ s moral and spiritual character on the basis of this notion of “ health. ” There is an unspoken imperative to always be in control , especially of one ’ s body . In recent studies on female urinary incontinence , for example , researchers noted the paradox of embodiment : While Christian tradition conceives of the body as weak flesh , the location of sin , it is also an instructive site of moral purpose and intentions , with health the sign of moral well-being . In this context , women move from innocent transgression to intentional adult immorality and accede to the legitimacy of loss of social membership as a consequence . “ If they knew you had a problem with your bladder , I think they would judge you differently ; they would think you had some fault . If you can ’ t control your bladder , how much control do you have over the rest of your life ? ” ( Dawn , [ the interviewee ] ) 28 Ironically , the researchers concluded that “ women associate incontinence not only with lack of physical and social control , but also with willfulness , ” just as children who are “ naughty ” intentionally breach and reject “ appropriate social behavior. ” 29 In a different context , Susan Bordo describes the way in which thin bodies ( signifying control over fat ) are read in our culture : “ Thinness represents a triumph of the will over the body , and the thin body . . . is associated with ‘ absolute purity , hyperintellectuality and transcendence of the flesh. ’ ” 30 Conversely , “ fat . . . is associated with the taint of matter and flesh , ‘ wantonness , ’ mental stupor . . . mental decay , ” and a weak will.31 Whether the incontinent body is read as actually being willful , or as in most cases fickle and loose , it is always associated with some sort of moral degradation or deviancy . The seemingly unfortunate association of women ’ s corporeality to the uncontrollable and the subsequent lived feminine experience of body as “ porous ” and “ seepage , ” serves as a constant reminder of the impossibility of the discrete and self-sufficient agent and may help reveal the illusion of static self-identity that serves the ego and prevents love . Though coming from a different line of thinking than Weil ’ s , Elizabeth Grosz reminds us that the experience “ force [ s ] megalomaniacal aspirations to earth , ” and “ demonstrate [ s ] the limits of subjectivity in the body. ” 32 What Grosz reveals , then , is the possibility for a radical revaluation of akrasia : rather than being a sign of moral degradation , it is a condition of humility , of ( literal/physiological ) openness to the world , that is , for Weil an ethical receptivity . It does not permit the false and problematic idea of sovereignty that we too often assume in relation to others or to our selves , or the corresponding colonizing demeanor that seeks conversion of the other to the same . In this way , experienced bodily incontinence could be read as a gift that can translate to the analogous release of the tyrannical self and therefore a negation of the tendency to dominate the world we encounter . Of course , because of the dominant paradigm , which reads incontinence in a negative light , virtues such as humility will be obscured and misread until , perhaps , in an unavoidable vulnerability due to necessity , one experiences a communion with the world or with another person that was formerly impossible . In light of these considerations , we propose that Weil ’ s idea of training ( dressage ) , which is the first stage of love , paradoxically leads to consent to and acceptance of ( bodily ) incontinence—not only for women—that reveals the illusion of the bounded self or ego . Therefore , although training makes use of the will , when oriented correctly , the discipline does not produce an amplification of the will , but it is already preparation for its release . Training , that is , reflects the Platonic characterization of philosophy as a preparation for and learning how to die , and it engenders humility rather than self-assuredness . Although Weil did not address or describe the particular lived experiences of the male or the female body in any significant way , mainly because of her commitment to impersonality and the universal human condition that transcends sexual distinctions and concerns , she did articulate general themes of human experience that reveal her perspective on the self as a controlling agent and the obstacles to a genuinely moral orientation that such a self generates . For her , the practice of training undermines the sovereignty of the self , without thereby suggesting that one be subject to natural powers or collude with a system of oppression and force . And it is precisely the deposing of the self that enables and is the sign of love . Anne Carson describes the deposition of self in love in a similar way : All at once a self never known before , which now strikes you as the true one , is coming into focus . A gust of godlikeness may pass through you and for an instant a great many things look knowable , possible , and present . Then the edge asserts itself . You are not god . You are not that enlarged self . Indeed , you are not even a whole self , as you now see . Your new knowledge of possibilities is also a knowledge of what is lacking in the actual.33 What Carson means by “ the edge ” is the alterity of the other person or the recognition of genuine externality and the “ not-me. ” In Weilienne terms , this edge may be another person , or it may be the reality or necessity of the world that triggers recognition of the void—in short , the distance between creation and Creator . That is , Weil acknowledges an essential feature of human existence that sets up imaginary boundaries between ourselves and the world : “ We are born in order to ‘ identify ’ ourselves . . . [ but ] one is never oneself . One is always something else , ” she writes in her Notebooks.34 Elsewhere , we have noted that she describes this condition as carrying around “ an imaginary divinity ” 35 that must be shed . We gravitate toward such identities because they lend a sense of certainty and stability , a presumption of the centrality of our projects , a “ security ” to our existence , and a preservation and even extension of our natural human limits . In short , the “ imaginary divinity ” is equivalent to the feeling of autonomy , self-sufficiency , and independence in identity that lends itself to the construction of incontinence ( and thereby supernatural love ) as a morally degraded state . As formerly noted , Weil recommends renunciation of this illusion in a process she calls decreation , and which is clearly a central part of training : It is as a limited being that one must renounce the self , and for this purpose all that is necessary is to recognize all limited things as being limited . If I were to think of everything which is limited as limited , there would no longer be anything in my thoughts which emanated from the “ I. ” 36 As we have shown , for Weil , decreation is the process of making the created uncreated , unraveling our constructed and reified identities to which we have become attached . This process is more often than not inspired by undergoing experiences of marginalization or encountering , in a significant way , one who is “ marginal. ” As bell hooks describes it , “ For me this space of radical openness is a margin—a profound edge . Locating oneself there is difficult but necessary . It is not a ‘ safe ’ place. ” 37 But significantly for Weil , this risky displacement through decreation requires a corresponding participation of the body in that change.38 She thinks it is not by accident that Plato describes genuine education , in the Republic , as a reorientation of the whole soul , necessitating a revolution of the body : “ But whereas we can turn our eyes in a new direction without or almost without using the body , it is not so as regards the soul . The soul can not turn its eyes in a new direction without turning entirely in that direction. ” 39 While intelligence , in its limited way , can sharpen its focus on any given natural phenomenon , wisdom is not attained until the ideas penetrate the body , in a process not unlike the one Rilke called “ blood-remembering. ” 40 This is what training accomplishes , according to her . Since we have a tendency to set up barricades around an illusory ego , our natural attempt to overcome this temptation is to amplify the will and resolve to be more humble or to intellectualize humility . Weil recognizes the contradictions in these decisions . Instead , she offers dressage or “ training ” as the practice of “ transforming the sense of effort into a passive sense of suffering. ” 41 To employ the will and intellect and assert control against the self for its own sake is paradoxically to preserve that very self and illusion one is trying to combat ; the mechanism to evade this trap must be wholly other . Recall her admonition : “ Whoever takes up the sword shall perish by the sword . And whoever does not take up the sword ( or lets it go ) shall perish on the cross. ” 42 In this light , the training that is required to avoid the ego ’ s insistent presence is a gradual release of oneself , or in other words , the losing of control and , thus , a preparation for death . For the loss of control is really a death for us . Again , it is impermissible that one “ choose the cross , ” for this does not carry us “ beyond the will. ” 43 However , when we renounce the controlling self in a negative way—by not resisting the reality of suffering or by not turning away from the socially marginalized , for example—we begin the process of “ uncreation ” that leads beyond ourselves via an ethical orientation characterized by loving attentiveness . Weil tells us , “ Note that although this training is a voluntary process , and therefore a natural one , it is only performed because the soul has been touched by the memory of the things above and its wings are beginning to sprout . And it is a negative operation. ” 44 Elsewhere , she describes this training as having to “ accomplish the possible in order to touch the impossible. ” 45 That is , love as the training of our desires where we are somatically affected ushers in a higher form of love wherein the subject , through his attentiveness , serves as the vehicle for the transmission of the good , beauty , and truth that are external to him and require his eclipse . He appears to lose his wits , sense of balance , and what has been deemed “ sane ” about him . In actuality , he is finally making contact with reality and thereby regaining his sanity in the midst of an insanely deluded and desensitized world . Before we delve into the issue of this higher form of love as attentiveness to the reality of the world , we should further consider the value of bodily suffering and vulnerability in training , as Weil understands it . As we have noted , her view is that “ the body plays a part in all apprenticeships. ” 46 We have something to learn from pain . “ On the plane of physical sensibility , suffering alone gives us contact with that necessity which constitutes the order of the world , ” she writes , clearly referencing Christ ’ s mediation on the cross as a model for us.47 That contact with necessity permits us to be “ wholly sensitive ” to the universe , in a way that pleasure does not . That contact is also requisite for philosophy as a preparation for dying : “ There is no philosophical reflection without an essential transformation in sensitivity and in the practice of living , a transformation that has an equal importance for the most ordinary and the most tragic circumstances of life. ” 48 It is not that we seek for suffering ( or “ choose the cross , ” ) but when it comes to us , as Weil writes , “ we have to open the very center of our soul to it , just as a woman opens her door to messengers from her loved one . What does it matter to a lover if the messenger be polite or rough , so long as he delivers the message ? ” 49 We must not make the mistake of concluding that Weil advocates submission to human abusers or tyrants ; in fact , openness to reality and the subsequent sensitivity will prompt resistance to and rigorous critique of human violence and force , while the escapist imagination may in fact diminish the level of cruelty in the oppressor out of fear or convenience . The broken or incontinent body ( whose margins have been blurred ) appears to be a qualified messenger of necessity , and an acknowledged helpmate of philosophy , reminding us , as it does , of our limits , finitude , dependency , and vulnerability in a way that circumvents and precludes a prideful self-centeredness . In this way , Weil affirms , “ So it becomes quite evident that philosophy does not consist in the acquisition of knowledge , as is the case with science , but in a change of the soul entirely. ” 50 Training , then , is not successful if it only results in different behavior through conditioning and habituation ; it must really effect a change in desires and therefore a reorientation of the soul toward the good . But this good is not experienced as a tangible something , but as a void , or an absence . This is why the process of reorientation and the subsequent new outlook will be felt as emptiness that many will perceive as suffering . We spoke earlier of a revaluation of akrasia and meant by that its potential for ethical conditioning . It may be , too , that akrasia , given this revaluation , is not necessarily experienced as strictly painful but as the opening of new possibilities . Weil describes this phenomenon : “ Pain is the color of certain events . When a man who can and a man who can not read look at a sentence written in red ink , they both see the same red color , but this color is not so important for the one as for the other. ” 51 How literate we are in terms of making connections between events , noting necessary relationships , and recognizing the limits of our own intelligence will determine to what extent we are pained by the development of love and its mastery of us . Thus , the question will be for us : How will we read the incontinent—or crucified—body , once we have contemplated its value in the philosophical orientation that is synonymous with love ? What is important in the experience of incontinence is not any particular sensation of pain , but the process and effect of undergoing , of pathos . To be sensitive to the universe , we need only recognize our innate marginality and void ; to be just , however , we must go farther . Recall Weil ’ s definition of moral innocence , personified by Christ : “ To be innocent is to bear the weight of the entire universe . It is to throw away the counterweight . In emptying ourselves we expose ourselves to all the pressure of the surrounding universe. ” 52 Without a doubt , pain often accompanies this disposal of the counterweight and consent to bear the weight of the world ; laying down the sword exposes us to persecution , as it did Christ to crucifixion . But the effect of the orientation is of secondary importance to the orientation itself and the potential for the expansion of love through the attentiveness it awakens . Just attention With the reorientation of the soul toward the good , self-control is finally displaced . It is not needed , however , because a new power has been submitted to , and the managerial self would only get in the way . This fact is what Socrates , as the true lover , recognizes in Phaedrus . Carson explains : Socrates ’ central argument , as he goes on to reevaluate madness , is that you keep your mind to yourself at the cost of closing out the gods . Truly good and indeed divine things are alive and active outside you and should be let in to work their changes . Such incursions formally instruct and enrich our lives in society ; no prophet or healer or poet could practice his art if he did not lose his mind , Socrates says ( 244a–45 ) . Madness is the instrument of such intelligence . More to the point , erotic mania is a valuable thing in private life . It puts wings on your soul.53 This argument , especially in Socrates ’ context , is quite radical and subversive . Whereas those who advocate self-control stockpile reinforcements against any erotic takeover and thus protect the status quo , Socrates casts love as a risk and adventure ; “ he unfolds himself for flight. ” 54 The loss of self for the sake of inspiration and recollection of what is divine is not an evil , as the traditional Greek attitude would have it,55 but is central to the philosophic spirit and anything that would be called “ education. ” But it also offers no predictable results or natural safety : “ If we want to have a love which will protect the soul from wounds , we must love something other than God. ” 56 For Weil , this radical and impossible love of God/the good implies a detachment via the renunciation of all possible ends— “ a renunciation that replaces the future with a void , as the imminent approach of death would do. ” 57 The impossible love that is oriented toward a void is nothing other than what Weil calls “ attention. ” Let us examine this posture in more detail and see how it is synonymous with justice . For Weil , attention is the decreative release of self to receive the world in all its reality . Paradoxically , this ( passive ) letting go of self and accompanying control is simultaneously a “ creative ” action : attention sees what is invisible ( as the Good Samaritan saw the bleeding , anonymous , dirty man in the ditch ) and hears what has been deprived of a voice because the din and smog generated from our maintenance of control has finally cleared . “ Those are the sounds and images , ” bell hooks tell us , “ that mainstream consumers find difficult to understand . Sounds and scenes which can not be appropriated are often that sign everyone questions , wants to erase , to ‘ wipe out. ’ ” 58 And we who have been so “ centered ” seek to eradicate these encounters , these voices , because we are destabilized by them—our solidity and our protective borders are troubled . However , Weil warns that before reaching the stage of attentiveness , “ we must have worn down our own will against the observance of rules ” in that practice she called training.59 This is why Weil argues that if attention can be called an effort , “ it is a negative effort , ” one that consists of suspending thought , agency , and will , and leaving us “ empty , waiting , not seeking anything , but ready to receive in its naked truth the object that is to penetrate [ us ] . ” 60 The most precious gifts are obtained , she suggests , by waiting for them , and they come to us as a surprise . She offers an example that is familiar to many of us of the mysterious effects of waiting attention : Suppose I have had a thought and have forgotten it two hours later . . . . I direct my attention for a few minutes towards an empty space ; empty but real . Then suddenly the thought is there , beyond all possible doubt . I did not know what it was , and yet now I recognize it as being what I was waiting for . An everyday experience , and an unfathomable mystery.61 This strange yet recognizable experience demonstrates the paradoxical efficaciousness of quieting the frantic and frenzied mind . Attention , for Weil , looks nothing like what we call attention today , when we urge schoolchildren , for instance , to pay attention . That command is meant to get students to go on an active search for answers , to focus—that is , to “ zoom in ” narrowly on a particular topic to the exclusion of others . It is an understandable prescription in a cultural landscape filled with distractions . Yet Weil ’ s idea of attention recommends a relaxing of the mind , not for lack of seriousness , but for the sake of openness to relations and ideas the subject ’ s own efforts would have excluded , whether consciously or unconsciously . The posture of attentiveness , then , may be compared to hungering—a refusal to fill the void . It is through this enriching emptiness that one may be penetrated by reality because the usual defenses , projections , and deflections have been surrendered . Rather than eating , then , attention is looking : “ Method for understanding images , symbols , etc . Not to try to interpret them , but to look at them till the light suddenly dawns. ” 62 This method has important implications for the ways in which mysteries and experiential ambiguities have been interpreted by humans in our active quests for certainty . Theology , in fact , is arguably one such attempt to construct meaning and impose order by interpreting events that transcend natural understanding through narrative projections and system-building . As Huston Smith contends : It was not the disciples ’ minds that were first drawn to Jesus . Rather . . . it was their experience—the experience of living in the presence of someone whose selfless love , crystalline joy , and preternatural power came together in a way his disciples found divinely mysterious . It was only a matter of time , however , before Christians felt the need to understand this mystery in order to explain it to themselves and to others . Christian theology was born , and from then on the Church was head as well as heart.63 As Smith goes on to describe , it is natural that our experience of invisible or inexplicable events should give rise to symbols and then conceptualizations of those symbols , as the mind actively seeks comprehension through what is familiar to it already . Theology is this systematization of our interpretations , which may explain why Weil reads the Gospels as a conception of human life rather than as a theology . The former mode of reading preserves mystery . A theology , by contrast , given Smith ’ s account , is necessarily a product of inattention but has the unfortunate effect of granting a pretense of knowledge ; theologies offer consummation and illusions of being “ full ” for the spiritually hungry . Unfortunately , in the same way that religious sacraments are confused with social ceremonies , love is often confused with consumption , attachment , and even active conquest . This is not to say that we are to refrain from human interactions or searches for meaning , but we should make every effort to refrain from consumptive attitudes and actions so that love may be possible . Weil writes , “ A gambler is capable of watching and fasting almost like a saint , ” but “ there is a great danger in loving God as the gambler loves his game , ” which is to say , with attachment and a consumptive demeanor.64 To love something or someone is simply to desire their existence independent of ourselves , our intrusions , and our interferences . And Weil eloquently describes this state : The beautiful is a carnal attraction which keeps us at a distance and implies a renunciation . This includes the renunciation of that which is most deep-seated , the imagination . We want to eat all the other objects of desire . The beautiful is that which we desire without wishing to eat it . We desire that it should be.65 Hence a soul loves in emptiness , in hunger . Contrary to our modern self-help mantras that insist on one ’ s own fulfillment/satisfaction/health in order to love another , Weil declares that the prerequisite to real love is void , sensitivity to suffering , renunciation of greedy attachments , and even renunciation of the desire for consummation—whether physical or intellectual . Moreover , the filling imagination must be countered by attention because the former leads us away from the present toward future “ rewards. ” This is why attention involves a detachment from all goals and projects—that is , a replacing of the future with a void , so that we do not escape into our projective imaginations to a-void what stands before us . In the same way that we do violence to others by demanding that they be the creatures of our imaginations , we also do violence to the present by making it subservient to a future where we believe these rewards await us . As we have described in Chapter 2 in the case of eschatological thinking , we seek an eventual equilibrium , some sort of compensation , and thus shun the recognition of our inherent vulnerability . In seeking refuge in the future , we become unable to love , as love requires reality and is a receptivity to that reality , which is to say attention to reality ’ s absolute presence that has no guaranteed happy endings . It is for these reasons that , as previously noted , Weil counters : “ We must prefer real [ present ] hell to an imaginary [ future ] paradise. ” 66 Such a preference , so against our nature , and demanding a kind of detachment that comes only from a long period of training , is the orientation of attention . It is accompanied by an attitude of waiting and patience , a sort of perseverance at the void . While it does indicate a detachment of sorts in the attentive person , loving attention does not excuse one from the world ; in fact , it involves her all the more . As Weil explains : But the detachment in question here is not without its object ; detached thought has as its object the establishment of a hierarchy among values , all values . Thus it has as its object a way of life , a better life , not somewhere else , but in this world and right now , for the values placed in order are the values of this world . In this sense philosophy is oriented toward life ; it aims at life through death.67 But this explanation of philosophical detachment only begs several questions : What values are illuminated by attention ? What is the “ better ” way of life that is the object of detachment ? If the attentive person epitomizes openness and vulnerability to reality , is she equipped with the energy to respond to the needs she perceives—or has the eclipse of herself disabled any response-ability ? Simply put , how does the attentive person weigh the demands of justice and care ? ( Or is it possible that these traditionally juxtaposed ethical concepts are reconciled in Weilienne attention ? ) Indeed , in many contemporary philosophical discussions of justice and care , these two concepts are described in ways that emphasize their distinctness from one another ; care and justice are seen as two separate moral orientations , involving different emphases , expectations of situations , virtues , vices , and often entailing different actions . Even their contraries—injustice and uncaring neglect—are also understood as being separate , even if related , issues . For example , Sara Ruddick in her essay , “ Injustice in Families : Assault and Domination , ” argues that under the care perspective , “ exemplary wrongs involve indifference , neglect , ” or inattentiveness , whereas from the justice perspective , wrongness is defined by a lack of the “ virtues of restraint and detachment , ” which signal the presence of domination and assault.68 What this means for her is that there may be “ little correlation ” between the tendencies to be inattentive/neglectful and assaultive . She describes this distinction in the context of motherhood : “ Some mothers , for example , are indifferent , inattentive , even frankly neglectful , but do not assault their children . Other mothers are protective and attentive , yet engage in assault. ” 69 Weil would argue that this divorcing of domination ( as injustice ) and inattention ( as uncaring ) is imagined , and that to be inattentive is to be unjust and violently so , given her understanding of attention . Although Ruddick makes reference to Weil as support for her argument , she unfortunately misappropriates Weil ’ s ethical philosophy . There are two major questions , then , that require investigation : How is it that inattentiveness is not distinct from domination/violent injustice in any morally significant way ? And , how is one able to cultivate this attentiveness that entails both care and justice ? The responses to these questions will reveal a revision of the traditional notion of inattentiveness such that our sense of responsibility will be heightened in times that would otherwise be assumed banal . Because of the stricter demands of attentiveness seen in this light , explaining its means of cultivation becomes a moral imperative , as well , and our analysis will reveal that the development of attention is simultaneously an ethical and an aesthetic process,70 mirroring the fact that Platonic love ( which is its inspiration ) is love of the good and the beautiful . One of the reasons that Ruddick and others institute a division between neglect ( uncaring ) and domination ( injustice ) is because the former is assumed to be passive—a lack of doing—whereas the latter is seen as active harm . This passive-active distinction abounds in philosophical debates on different ethical dilemmas ( for instance , passive versus active euthanasia ) , but the divide is often shown to be superfluous , arbitrary , and a cause of harm more than clarity . Take for instance Peggy McIntosh ’ s discussion of “ privilege ” as “ unearned advantage and conferred dominance ” that is accorded to whites , males , and heterosexuals , among other categories—we might add “ Christians ” to the list—in the United States.71 Privilege , she says , is like an “ invisible knapsack ” that such groups carry around and are oblivious to . But the word “ privilege ” carries the connotation of being something everyone should want and strive toward , and it gives its possessors seeming permission to dominate and control ( i.e. , to be unjust ) simply by virtue of belonging to that group . In our mundane way of seeing things , one who is simply privileged is not guilty of doing anything and is therefore not “ unjust. ” It may be that they are oblivious to the plight of those suffering from oppression , but this is assumed to be an unfortunate effect of a desirable status rather than injustice defined as aggression toward or intrusion upon the other . However , even McIntosh ’ s description makes clear the active aspect of privilege : with privilege , one is permitted dominance and power to control . Moreover , in this station , one is more liable to see only “ active ” and explicit forms of oppression as problematic , and to be blind to their own oppressive stances and “ embedded ” forms of oppression ( no less active ) . As a white woman , McIntosh writes , In my class and place , I did not see myself as racist because I was taught to recognize racism only in individual acts of meanness by members of my group , never in invisible systems conferring unsought racial dominance on my group from birth . Likewise , we are taught to think that sexism or heterosexism is carried on only through individual acts of discrimination , meanness , or cruelty toward women , gays , and lesbians . . . .72 Still , the question remains as to whether “ permission to dominate ” can be identified with being domineering or being unjust . At first glance , it would appear to be an unwarranted equivocation . Nevertheless , the inattentiveness that accompanies such privilege makes certain ( unjust ) actions inevitable , and other ( loving ) actions impossible . It is Weil ’ s understanding of the nature of attention , on the one hand , and the power to dominate , on the other , that leads us to be suspicious of divorcing privileged obliviousness from outright acts of domination . Attention , for her , is a radical renunciation of our own projects , desires , biases , and ambitions in order to be truly receptive to the reality of others and the external world . Attention “ lets otherness be. ” 73 Because it involves a bracketing of self-centered aims and images , the attentive person is able to see what is ( because of our self-preoccupations ) usually invisible and hear what is usually silent or muffled sound . For Weil , attention characterizes artistic geniuses , then , as much as it does saints ; it is creative and inspired by virtue of our decreation . It rids us of the clichés and obscurities caused by our persistent egos , and it reveals to us the “ knapsacks of privilege ” we carry unconsciously . As we have described in Chapter 3 , we are naturally constituted by void , but everything in our being revolts against recognizing this . We described how the “ filling imagination ” functions to disguise this nature , but there is a more passive aspect to our natural state , too , that makes attention nearly impossible . As Weil contends : “ We are born and live in unconsciousness . We are unconscious of our misery . . . . The degradation of affliction always has this effect : the soul clings to it until it is no longer capable of detaching itself ( ersatz of resignation ) . ” 74 We are attached , that is , to our captivity in ignorance and feel hatred for sources of illumination that bring things into proper perspective . We become actively aggressive toward anything ( real ) that challenges our imagined centrality . Thus , fantasy—or daydreaming or l ’ imagination combleuse—is the enemy of attention , for Weil , and our usual mode of consciousness is a fantastic one because of the ego ’ s natural tendency to protect itself through imagined narratives and deflections of all sorts . This is also what injustice is . However , when we renounce the falsifying and fantastic imagination , a “ transformation then takes place at the very roots of our sensibility , ” says Weil.75 She describes the transformation via analogy : It is a transformation analogous to that which takes place in the dusk of evening on a road , where we suddenly discern as a tree what we had at first seen as a stooping man ; or where we suddenly recognize as a rustling of leaves what we thought at first was whispering voices . We see the same colors ; we hear the same sounds , but not in the same way.76 To give another example , many of us could relate to the kind of change of perspective effected after traveling abroad for this first time . We see our native country , our habits , our religion , and our attitudes about other nations differently ; we smell and taste our own cuisine differently ; we begin to experience time differently , and we hear our music differently . These transformations occur because of a rupture and subsequent detachment from what was familiar and taken for granted as being the definition of what is most real . Our neat categories become absurd in the face of unexpected encounters , and we realize the extent to which we had been at the center of our supposedly sacred narratives . In this way , attention grants the reality of what has been deprived of being , such as the Good Samaritan did before the naked , bleeding , and anonymous fellow lying in the ditch on the side of the road in the famous Gospel story . Clearly for Weil , attention brings an epiphany ; but does the imagination entail the sort of violent objectification that Ruddick characterized as injustice ? Is inattention synonymous with ( active ) domination ? The answer to these questions lies in Weil ’ s depiction of evil , as described in Chapter 3 . Recall the way in which she characterizes the root of both sadistic assault and the convenient neglect of one who suffers : “ There are no other restraints upon our will than material necessity and the existence of other human beings around us . Any imaginary extension of these limits is seductive , so there is a seduction in whatever helps us to forget the reality of the obstacles. ” 77 In other words , when we are inattentive , human lives are emptied of their reality and people are turned into puppets . Inattention is active in the sense that it consists in ( imaginarily ) extending our limits , through and over the existence of others , who should serve as our limits . This happens not only in cases of war and slavery ( or assault and domination ) but also in the more common cases of our egotistical projections of our desires that result in our not seeing or hearing the affliction and needs of others . Therefore , it is characteristic of inattention to wield power actively over others . Weil often compares our self-satisfying delusions ( or , the obliviousness of privilege ) to wielding a sword , in the complete license it appears to permit : “ The sword affords deliverance . . . from the intolerable weight of our obligation. ” 78 In light of this metaphor , ego-defensiveness is a violent posture and can not be resistant to the temptation of force . She cites Thucydides , who described the necessity by which humans command wherever they are able and have power : Possibility and necessity are terms opposed to justice . . . Possible means all that the strong can impose upon the weak . It is reasonable to examine how far this possibility goes . Supposing it to be known , it is certain that the strong will accomplish his purpose to the extreme limit of possibility . It is a mechanical necessity.79 To refuse to see the limitation manifested by others and to contemplate only what is possible for us to accomplish within a particular context is the meaning of inattention . Without doubt , this singular and exclusionary focus is the initiation of the automatic and mechanical expansion of our projects , and it implies the absence of respect for the being of others as ends-in-themselves . In Ruddick ’ s own words , From the perspective of justice , relationships require restraint of one ’ s own aggression , intrusion , and appropriation , and respect for the autonomy and bodily integrity of others . . . . A primary temptation . . . is to flout the rules of fair play , taking whatever you can get , what you are strong or lucky enough to be able to exact.80 Clearly , inattentiveness ( understood here as disregarding the reality of other persons in favor of self-aggrandizement ) is then synonymous with injustice , and the corollary , that attentiveness ( or in Ruddick ’ s terms , “ care ” ) is justice , is also true . As Weil puts it , “ We have invented the distinction between justice and charity [ caritas ] ” 81 because our more convenient notion of justice dispenses us from the constant vigilance demanded by attention . Have we , in our industrialized late-capitalistic societies , made ourselves more immune to the void and to the hunger that signals it ? Certainly , now we have more and easier access to false foods , as it were , ( via the instant gratification of digital technology and of mass-produced material surplus ) than ever before . Have we not descended into a vortex of sensing entitlement not-to-suffer , of not-to-feel-hunger ? Instead of looking or attending , arguably we have taken up the consumptive posture of voyeuristic watching ( of spectacles ) .82 Even Weil , writing in the early 1940s , recognized : “ The talking cinema is very much like [ Plato ’ s ] cave . Which shows how much we love our degradation. ” 83 This latter activity is not one of openness , for we go into watching with expectations , usually expectations of entertainment.84 Watching is also an activity that protects power , privilege , and obliviousness on one side while on the other side , certain groups of people are subjected to illusory fabrications ( i.e. , violence ) at the hands of those who fashion these distractions . In the urgency of subsequent a-voiding , in our lust for control and power and the suppression of love , we have become the personification of one side only of the cold steel of the metaphorical sword ; we are the side of brute violence and aggression : Contact with the sword causes the same defilement , whether it be through the handle or the point . For him who loves , its metallic coldness will not destroy love , but will give the impression of being abandoned by God . Supernatural love has no contact with force , but at the same time it does not protect the soul against the coldness of force , the coldness of steel . . . If we want to have a love which will protect the soul from wounds , we must love something other than God.85 We need to release the handle of the sword if we wish to be attentive , though of course , the release itself would imply attention . This release is none other than the divine mania ( what Weil calls “ supernatural love ” ) elucidated in Phaedrus . Clearly , this reorienting is risk-filled : releasing the handle of the sword may mean that we find ourselves quickly at the point , and as we have demonstrated , for Weil this release is exemplified by the Crucifixion . Again , modern psychology calls this move “ masochistic. ” 86 But Weil tells us , “ This is not any kind of masochism . What excites masochists is only the semblance of cruelty , because they don ’ t know what cruelty is. ” 87 Conversely , the one who attends to reality knows affliction and suffering and the absence of God , this other side of cruelty . It is in this tangible absence of the good that we must wait and be irresistibly impelled to action . Haste and distractions are , in this state , perpetual temptations . But as Weil warned , “ Alas for her if she gets tired and goes away . For the two places where God and humanity are waiting are at the same point in the fourth dimension . . . ” 88 This point is the mid-point between life and death , the good and the necessary , the possible and impossible , the human and divine . This is a no-man ’ s land , an intolerable ambiguity . This is the place of Antigone , of Socrates , of Jesus , of all such mediators . It is the place and experience of the cross—that is to say , being “ nailed down ” to the present , in exile—where there is a peculiar but unrecognizable advantage in the nourishment of our attention . Affliction and the impersonal To complete our analysis of loving attention as justice , we ought to consider the fact of what Weil called malheur ( roughly translated as “ affliction ” and embodied , par excellence , by the crucified Christ ) 89 as a large part of what constitutes human reality and is perhaps the strongest challenge to attention—both for the victim and the attendant . First , in a surprising statement , Weil tells us that the love of one who is afflicted is comparable to the love of beauty , as both have a tendency to inspire renunciation and thus are great occasions for the cultivation of attention . She writes , for instance , “ Beauty is a fruit which we look at without trying to seize it . The same with an affliction which we contemplate without drawing back. ” 90 Of course , while the phenomenon of affliction may be spiritually useful in this way , this does not mean that it is something to be desired or sought , as is the case with beauty . Moreover , Weil tells us : “ I should not love my suffering because it is useful . I should love it because it is. ” 91 But there is something else that links real beauty and affliction and is essential to their very being : both beauty and affliction carry an element of impersonality in themselves , such that eventually the impersonal also becomes the character of one who attends to these phenomena . What does Weil mean by “ impersonality , ” however ? And how could impersonality constitute attention—that is , love—to this person ? Beyond these questions , we must also consider the other tendency of affliction—its supreme ability to produce flight from the void . Weil knew , and we are aware , that in this world , some people will attract our notice ( “ either through the hazard of circumstances or some chance affinity ” ) and others will remain anonymous to us , escaping our gaze , or at most , we will see them “ as items of a collectivity. ” 92 When Christ said that we have to love our neighbor , the example he gave as an illustration of that commandment was that being who was anonymous and forgotten , lying naked and bleeding on the roadside . Thus the love directed toward him would be , according to Weil , “ completely anonymous , and for that reason , completely universal love. ” 93 Because humans are unequal in terms of their relations to the things of the world , it is imperative to give respect to that which is equal and identical in all humans , namely their “ unquenchable desire for good. ” 94 In this way , we remember that what is to be attended to ( and thus loved ) in another is her hunger , or void ; this is , after all , the reality of the human creature , and “ love needs reality. ” 95 To do this , however , is paradoxically to direct one ’ s attention beyond this world , because the universal human reality is linked to the supernatural reality , its origin . The human void , that is , implies “ a reality outside the world . . . outside space and time , outside man ’ s mental universe , outside any sphere whatsoever that is accessible to human faculties. ” 96 The void is only the universal absence of God—the inverse reflection of the supernatural . According to Weil , by virtue of directing our minds with attention toward that supernatural , we are able to make real contact with the universal center and essence of the human being who is afflicted , thereby enabling good to work through us . Those who love in this way are the sole intermediaries for true goodness to manifest in our earthly existence . So for Weil , this universal aspect of humans that is the link to the other reality is “ sacred , ” and it is what goes by the name of the “ impersonal. ” 97 It is given an elevated status in part because all errors that we commit ( including what are called “ sins ” ) are tied to the human personality , whereas “ perfection is impersonal ” and on the level of anonymity.98 Thus , when we turn with loving attention to another human , it is because we have first detached from the temporal things of the world to turn entirely toward God , an altogether impersonal and self-renouncing experience in itself . Moreover , since “ affliction is anonymous before all things ” and “ deprives its victims of their personality and makes them into things , ” 99 if we can turn attentively toward one who is afflicted ( which is to say , toward her impersonality , or her yearning for the good ) , we are prevented from consuming or assimilating her into ourselves or our own limited experiences . Why ? Emptiness , by definition , can not be eaten , but must be regarded . It is then that we are forced to remember our own hunger and , therefore , what absolutely unites us with the rest of humanity . For Weil , this should also be the effect of our contemplation of Christ ’ s suffering on the cross—not satisfaction ( by viewing it as a means to the resurrection ) , but a consent to suffer with others in the face of necessity ( compassion ) . Recognition of this commonality in humans by attending to the supernatural is “ the only possible motive for universal respect , ” according to Weil.100 This is because if we keep our attention tied to the horizontal plane of existence and the world of facts ( rather than to verticality , or the good ) , we become unconsciously susceptible to prejudice , self-interest , proximity , convenience , pleasure , and all sorts of factors that preclude a nonpartisan ( real ) perspective and response . What is required by this supernatural attention demands everything of us : The entire soul—including therefore its sentient and carnal part which is rooted in the things of sense and draws life from them . It must be uprooted . And this is death . . . . The loss of anything or anyone we are attached to is directly experienced as a sense of dejection which corresponds to a loss of energy . And what we have to do is to lose all the vital energy which is supplied to us by all the things and all the people we are attached to . . . . Thus it is total detachment that is the condition for the love of God , and when once the soul has performed the motion of totally detaching itself from the world so as to turn entirely towards God , it is illumined by the truth which comes down to it from God.101 But the obvious question here is , what does it mean to turn the attention toward God ( or the supernatural ) , especially if this is something we can not , by definition , and by our limitations , know ? In some sense , God can not be an “ object ” of attention , for conceptions of God and theologies are necessarily artifices , as we have argued at length . Our attention , or love , can not have God for its direct object , since “ God is not present to the soul and has never yet been so. ” 102 What is possible is indirect or implicit love of God , which is ultimately “ destined to become the love of God. ” 103 Such implicit love of God , as for example , the creative attention to the afflicted , is the fulfilling of the commandment “ Thou shalt love the Lord thy God , ” and is the only sensible meaning of it , according to Weil . We appear to have run into a contradiction : On the one hand , we must love God directly and detach ourselves from earthly , sensible things ; on the other , God can not be a direct object of our love , so we must turn to the world to love God implicitly—the only way we can . But there is no contradiction . What we attend to , for instance , in another person , is of a supernatural/universal order : the impersonal longing for the good . This sort of attention is a detachment from the temporal and perishable , for the yearning is an eternal one . In the same way , when we attend to the impersonal necessity of the natural world , we share in a universal perspective that is a reflection of the supernatural : “ Christ tells us to contemplate and imitate the lilies of the field and the birds of the air , in their indifference as to the future and their docile acceptance of destiny ; and another time he invites us to contemplate and imitate the indiscriminate distribution of rain and sunlight. ” 104 The effect of such attention to what is impersonal in the world is similar in both cases : we are displaced from our imaginary center of the universe , and with us , our false ideas of time , our parochial hierarchy of values , our sense of what is real and what is not—all the convenient projections of our ego are put in their proper place , which is to say , as merely one among others . However , there is a special problem when it comes to attending to the afflicted . As Weil rightly notes , oftentimes , when we encounter someone who is afflicted , we are practically unable via our own natural efforts to give this person any moment of attention . We can scarcely look in their direction . Weil writes : Thought revolts from contemplating affliction , to the same degree that living flesh recoils from death . A stag advancing voluntarily step by step to offer itself to the teeth of a pack of hounds is about as probable as an act of attention directed towards a real affliction , which is close at hand , on the part of a mind which is free to avoid it . But that which is indispensable to the good and is impossible naturally is always possible supernaturally.105 It is true that an encounter with affliction , whether experienced directly or indirectly through empathy , can , by virtue of its horror , induce a flight into unending distractions and deflections of reality . Weil acknowledges : “ Whoever endures a moment of the void either receives the supernatural bread or falls . It is a terrible risk but one that must be run , even during the instant when hope fails . But , ” she adds , “ we must not throw ourselves into it. ” 106 The last clause is crucial , for the seeking out of affliction implies the retention of control , power , and will in manipulating force ; by definition , then , one is unable to bring affliction upon oneself . We may be able to bring suffering upon ourselves , but not affliction , because part of what distinguishes affliction is the component of real social exile—it is something externally imposed and therefore truly bitter . As Weil says , “ [ Affliction ] is quite a different thing from simple suffering . It takes possession of the soul and marks it through and through with its own particular mark , the mark of slavery. ” 107 More precisely , she states : There is not real affliction unless the event that has seized and uprooted a life attacks it , directly or indirectly , in all its parts , social , psychological , and physical . The social factor is essential . There is not really affliction unless there is social degradation or the fear of it in some form or another.108 Ironically , then , the afflicted one who is the literal embodiment of the living dead—a monster109—makes it nearly impossible for one who looks at her for only a second to engage the imagination , to make “ a suitable adjustment of the mind. ” 110 The veil has been ripped away . The only option left is complete a-voidance—looking away . How , then , is it possible to turn with love toward the one who is afflicted ? On one level , this action is impossible . As we have seen , our thought naturally revolts from contemplating affliction , and our tendencies of self-preservation keep it at bay . Also , Weil notes that affliction can not be communicated to those who have not experienced it , and “ as for those who have themselves been mutilated by affliction , they are in no state to help anyone at all. ” 111 “ Thus , ” she concludes , “ compassion for the afflicted is an impossibility. ” 112 But of course , Weil does not mean that such compassion is a literal impossibility and that we are excused from it ; it is only an impossibility on the natural level of human effort . Here we must recall an important lesson in the cultivation of attention ( manifested in this context as “ compassion ” ) : if one has desired to be attentive in such situations already , as evidenced by the training undertaken to clear away distractions , then supernatural energy will make the impossible possible . In this context , her words regarding training— “ we have to accomplish the possible in order to touch the impossible ” 113—take on new meaning . And this applies to the afflicted one as well : The soul has to go on loving in the emptiness , or at least to go on wanting to love , though it may only be with an infinitesimal part of itself . Then , one day , God will come to show himself to this soul and to reveal the beauty of the world to it , as in the case of Job . But if a soul stops loving it falls , even in this life , into something almost equivalent to hell.114 The phenomenon of affliction as a test of attention is an extremely precarious one . But if an original consent to the void has been made , the development of love and attention grows exponentially in confronting atrocity and degradation , for “ affliction compels us to recognize as real what we do not think possible. ” 115 Again , the description of this phenomenon ’ s potential for the growth of attention can be prescriptive in no way . We raise the issue only to suggest , as Weil does , that it reveals our a-voidance and ( dis ) orientation to ourselves , in a most concrete way . “ One can only accept the existence of affliction by considering it at a distance , ” she tells us.116 ( This claim appears verified by the well-known contemporary phenomenon in which masses of people flood internet sites promising to show gory videos of human cruelty and torture , as an apparent source of amusement . ) 117 However , the distance itself is not the problem , as long as there is attention ; the problem is the looking away , which may take the form of a consumptive imagination : “ Sin is not a distance , it is a turning of our gaze in the wrong direction , ” 118 which is to say , away from reality and its inherent connections , and toward personal aims that have become inflated , including the transformation of everything into a spectacle for our entertainment . And this turning away from reality , though itself constituting a choice , means that a person gives himself over to the laws of moral and spiritual gravity , where “ he thinks that he can decide and choose , but he is only a thing , a stone that falls. ” 119 In turning away from the “ supernatural light ” that illuminates the real irreducibility of affliction and the impersonal order , the mere spectator becomes obedient to those blind and mechanical laws of gravity , where his subsequent choices are only semblances of choice . It is important to note this irony : a man flees the scene of affliction through his imagination , presumably because the objectness and abjectness of the afflicted fill him with the horror of losing his own person ( i.e. , his freedom ) , but this is precisely what he loses in turning away . On the level of attention that can really “ look ” at affliction ( having been prepared by training in solitude and exercises of self-effacement ) , freeing love is truly made possible . Here is where decreation happens , and where false gods flee the scene , for affliction is felt as the irreducible and unavoidable absence of God . Consider Weil ’ s example of attending to an afflicted other , which is also a perfect example of the refusal to consume him as a spectacle : One of two [ humans ] is only a little piece of flesh , naked , inert , and bleeding beside a ditch ; he is nameless ; no one knows anything about him . Those who pass by this thing scarcely notice it , and a few minutes afterward do not even know that they saw it . Only one stops and turns his attention toward it . The actions that follow are just the automatic effect of this moment of attention . The attention is creative . But at the moment when it is engaged it is a renunciation . . . The man accepts to be diminished by concentrating on an expenditure of energy , which will not extend his own power but will only give existence to a being other than himself , who will exist independently of him . Still more , to desire the existence of the other is to transport himself into him by sympathy , and as a result , to have a share in the state of inert matter which is his.120 We see here that creative attention , which is really a decreation , causes us to be transported into the afflicted Other , rather than the reverse , which is caused by the imagination : transporting the unconsenting Other into us and our fantasies . Thus , loving and attending to the Other means that we accept diminishment of our egos , for it is a necessary consequence any time we are truly open to the reality of other persons . In this loving , we also detach ourselves from any possible return from the beings we love . According to Weil , loving our neighbor means being able to ask him , “ What are you going through ? ” “ It is a recognition the sufferer exists , ” she contends , “ as a man , exactly like us , who was one day stamped with a special mark by affliction. ” 121 In other words , to love is to embrace the void of another without trying to fill it with our own finite and limited human ( pseudo- ) solutions and easy consolations ; after all , even these well-intentioned tactics too often are meant to help us forget our own hunger . Hunger ( or the void ) is our universal reality , as we have seen : The danger is not lest the soul should doubt whether there is any bread , but lest , by a lie , it should persuade itself that it is not hungry . It can only persuade itself of this by lying , for the reality of its hunger is not a belief , it is a certainty.122 Though we may not think we wish to possess the being we approach , the distance effected by self-renunciation is necessary to maintain our humility before , and hence our love for her . Again , we must love in the other what is real . Weil reminds us , “ To be able to love in our neighbor the hunger that consumes him and not the food he offers for the appeasement of our own hunger—this implies a total detachment . It implies that one renounces feeding on man and wants in the future to feed only on God. ” 123 Still , there remain questions about the lived experience of this detached and impersonal love—for both the lover and the recipient . Is this supernatural love ultimately satisfying to humans ’ needs ? Can universal love account for the real complexities of interpersonal relationships with particular others ? In recent decades , there has been much criticism of theories of love such as the one just presented . As we will demonstrate , critics argue that this impersonal love amounts to an abdication of responsibility and avoidance of genuine commitment to the complexities of human relations . How might Weil respond to these serious charges ? Facing the other ? If love is conceptually a paradox for Simone Weil , in her personal life it was arguably “ an ordeal. ” 124 While many , such as Father Joseph-Marie Perrin , marveled at “ her love for the disinherited of this world ” in all the forms it took , the same has also noted an “ interior problem ” : “ Kind and merciful as she was , ” Perrin wrote , “ she would sometimes tend to make the exacting demands of a merciless logician. ” 125 Gustave Thibon remarked that “ she was inwardly founded on love like those volcanoes of the arctic regions of which the lava is hidden under a covering of ice. ” 126 Weil herself , in writing to one of her pupils in the spring of 1935 , during the time of her employment at the Renault factories , confesses , I can tell you that when , at your age , and later on too , I was tempted to try to get to know love , I decided not to—telling myself that it was better not to commit my life in a direction impossible to foresee until I was sufficiently mature to know what , in a general way , I wish from life and what I expect from it.127 It is entirely apropos that this “ problem ” was evidenced in both Weil ’ s writings and in the records we have of her short life , for there was rarely , if ever , a bifurcation between these two aspects in her . Describing the rarity of the authentic unity that typified her life and thought , E. W. F. Tomlin tells us , “ The false mystic is concerned with elaborating what he has seen , or with trying to define and convey the emotions which accompanied his vision . Simone Weil is solely engaged in the seeing. ” 128 Thus , what she sees , that is , what she attends to , will by necessity and definition come to inhabit her being and hence will resist objectification . For instance , Weil readily admitted that there were ideas that would not let her rest , words that had the innate virtue of illumination and edification , but not consolation— “ vertical ” words such as God , truth , justice , and , significantly for our purposes here , love.129 Such words imply a risk and a danger , because there is the constant temptation to elaborate and posit conceptualizations through associating them with the horizontal and familiar . But because these words refer to absolute perfection , for Weil , and “ are the image in our world of [ the ] impersonal and divine order of the universe , ” we should not try to make them conform to our limited paradigms , since their realities are beyond conceptualization.130 Rather , we must accept them as “ uncomfortable companions , ” and in finding associated ideas and actions in the light they shed , come to abolish “ everything in contemporary life which buries the soul under injustice , lies , and ugliness. ” 131 Love , then , being one such “ uncomfortable companion ” for Weil and being described as light and not consolation,132 will naturally be found mystifying not only to the intellect but also to the lived experience . Rush Rhees is one scholar who openly struggled with Weil ’ s notion of purity , especially in its implications for love . In letters to his friend , M. O ’ C . Drury , and in notes never intended to be published,133 Rhees confronted the difficulties—both theoretical and practical—that he imagined would ensue from a total acceptance of Weil ’ s love philosophy . In fact , as we noted earlier , Rhees goes so far as to write that this pure love “ in her hands . . . goes to ways which are . . . in a deep sense evil. ” 134 There are four major points of his critique we have identified that lead him to the conclusion that Weilienne love is quite possibly evil , and which need to be addressed . Although D. Z. Phillips makes an important point in saying , “ Rhees ’ s concentration on difficulties counters the easy tendency for religious admiration of Simone Weil to lead to an uncritical acceptance of everything she says , ” her insights regarding the nature of supernatural love are more nuanced than they tend to be presented by critics such as Rhees.135 While we do not pretend that there are any final resolutions to the challenges , it seems clear that Rhees neglected to consider important factors , not only chez Simone Weil but also in broader philosophical and historical frameworks . For instance , as we will describe , the social activism of another early twentieth-century female philosopher , Jane Addams , provides some pertinent parallels to Weil ’ s thinking about universal love . Nevertheless , there are others like Rhees who would provide strong challenges to Weil ’ s perspective on love—including those who emphasize “ interpersonal ” religious ethics , like Emmanuel Levinas , and those who emphasize care ethics , like Nel Noddings . We will examine possible critiques from these figures , in addition to Rhees ’ s , and proffer Weilienne responses . To begin , Rhees stated or implied the following four challenges , which we will subsequently examine closely because they represent the most common objections raised to Weil ’ s idea of impersonal and supernatural love . First , Weil ’ s notion of pure love involves an indifference to the temporal life of others and self , whereas many think that in loving a particular person , one “ ought to hope that things will go one way ” and not another for them.136 Second , charity and compassion necessarily require some form of attachment.137 Third , wanting to be physically near the beloved does not necessarily mean wanting to possess ( or consume ) them , but rather this may really indicate a love for them and not a love of the possession of them.138 Finally , cutting attachment to the world is a “ flight from responsibility ” ; it “ disregards the dependence of others on you , ” and it is “ evil. ” 139 Furthermore , Rhees claims that Weil ignores the suffering inherent in intimate relations ( e.g. , marriage or parent-child relationships ) , instead focusing her discussions on love of strangers and love of God , throwing into question whether she could love humans as humans.140 In general , Rhees ’ problems with Weil ’ s notions of purity and love are arguably more ( self- ) disclosive of the human attachment to attachment itself , rather than suggestive of something “ evil ” inherent in Weil ’ s thought . By carefully and philosophically revisiting themes central to Weil ’ s ethical-religious account of love , such as the void , detachment , “ gift , ” 141 charity , and distance , we do not attempt to solve the perplexities of pure love in Weil ’ s writings and life but to dissolve some of the problems that are unnecessarily projected onto the issue . The first problem Rhees identifies concerns the practical consequences of Weil ’ s contention that pure love must be a detached love . For example , she writes , Every desire for enjoyment belongs to the future and the world of illusion , whereas if we desire only that a being should exist , he exists : what more is there to desire ? . . . In this sense , and on condition that [ love ] is not turned toward a pseudo-immortality conceived on the model of the future , the love we devote to the dead is perfectly pure.142 Indeed , as we have seen , for Weil , love is simply the desire for the existence of a being , without the escape into the ( imaginary ) future . But Rhees ponders , “ It would seem to follow [ from this ] that if you love someone , you ought not to be concerned about what may happen to him while he is alive . You ought not even to care whether in his life he is going to come nearer to God or to be degraded. ” 143 For him , love entails that we ought to hope that things will go one way , and not another . One might simply respond that Rhees confuses an “ is ” for an “ ought. ” That is to say , just because we often do hope for particular things for those we love does not imply that we should . But why shouldn ’ t one do so ? Weil makes it clear that “ the future is a filler of void places. ” 144 Hoping , as a futurally oriented phenomenon,145 would be tied up , according to Weil , with the workings of the imagination , in its projections for certain ends , either for oneself or for another . Therefore , in hoping , one would not be fully attentive to the present existent , and while we may believe ourselves to be participating in the good , we have in fact allowed ourselves to be distracted from reality , where we could have become intermediaries for the good . Perhaps this only demonstrates Vance Morgan ’ s point about Rhees : “ Rhees ’ problem with Weil , ” he writes , “ is on a metaphysical level and is an example of an interpreter attempting to understand a text from within the confines of a particular metaphysical framework , when the author of the text is writing from within the confines of an entirely different framework. ” 146 Indeed , rather than hoping for good , it is for humans to turn their attention and love toward “ the reality that exists outside the reach of all human faculties , ” and in so doing , to become mediators through which good can descend from there and come among one ’ s fellows.147 As we have shown , to love is to be just . Hence it is not merely a metaphysical difference for Weil and Rhees , but it follows from Weil ’ s understanding of this love of reality that all persons would be established as equals in their capacity to attend to what transcends contingency and particular contexts . Hoping for a particular end for another , then , is not only escapist but also short-sighted , presumptuous , and self-satisfying ; for in hoping , I hope that , and am thereby transferred to another reality—that is to say , unreality . It is no surprise that “ hope ” is one of those words that is ( and has been ) easily appropriated by political campaigns , for the politician seeking election desires nothing so much as to have his constituents forget about the present . Instead of hoping , waiting ( without knowing for what ) or “ listening ceaselessly ” is the mode by which one becomes a vessel for true goodness . Only by renouncing every form of the imagination—hoping included—do we preserve the interior void , a condition for love . As Weil asks , “ If we accept no matter what void , what stroke of fate can prevent us from loving the universe ? ” 148 Regarding his second critique , in questioning the theoretical soundness of Weil ’ s notion of loving in the void , Rhees insinuates that charity and compassion necessitate some form of attachment , thus throwing doubt on whether love is really always “ detached. ” He writes , “ Sometimes Simone Weil speaks as though all attachment were something like the attachment of a miser for his treasure . But of course she can not hold to this line , since it makes nonsense of charity , of compassion , and so on. ” 149 In order to assess whether Rhees is correct in his insinuation , we must first give an account of authentic charity , or benefaction , and then proceed to its implications for pure love . When one is charitable , one gives a gift . Jean-Luc Marion , in his “ phenomenology of givenness , ” has had this to say about what constitutes a gift : The gift , to be given , must be lost and remain lost without return . In this way alone does it break with exchange , where one gives only to have it repaid ( with a marginal profit ) . . . [ I ] t is a question of the pure and simple loss involved in giving with abandon . . . . Hence the paradox : the gift must be lost for me , but not for everybody . It ’ s necessary that an Other receive it and definitely deprive me of it.150 From Marion ’ s compelling description of a gift , we see that detachment is a necessary ingredient of charity ; otherwise , when one is attached , ( even to the intended beneficiary ! ) what one engages in is not properly giving , or benefaction , or charity , but some sort of controlled economic exchange . If one is attached to the Other who receives , there is necessarily a return to self in the so-called giving ; “ investment ” would be a more appropriate label . Pure love , on the other hand , would compel the giving , such that it would not even be recognized as such . Weil cites the disciples : “ Lord , when was it that we saw you hungry and gave you food , or thirsty and gave you something to drink ? ” 151 Giving , for Weil , would involve the Hindu mandate to be detached “ from the fruits of action . . . to act not for an object but from necessity. ” 152 She tells us , “ Every act should be considered from the point of view not of its object but of its impulsion . The question is not ‘ What is the aim ? ’ It is ‘ What is the origin ? ’ ” 153 And clearly , for her , the origin should be God . Hence , “ [ w ] e should not go to our neighbor for the sake of God , but we should be impelled toward our neighbor by God , as the arrow is driven toward its target by the archer. ” 154 Nowhere in this depiction of charitable action would attachment be a possibility . Again , this is not simply a metaphysical matter , but an ethical one as well . What would it mean for there to be an attachment , even to the Other , in the act of giving ? Would the recipient not feel the constraint of the attachment , and if so , are we not buying him ? Weil tells us , for instance , “ Almsgiving when it is not supernatural is like a sort of purchase . It buys the sufferer. ” 155 Thus , it becomes clear that real loss , which cuts the cords of attachment , is necessary for the gift to be pure . Weil writes , “ Benefaction is permissible precisely because it constitutes a humiliation still greater than pain , a still more intimate and undeniable proof of dependence. ” 156 This mention of dependence would seem to contradict what we have established concerning the absence of attachment in giving . But she continues , “ The dependence , however , must be on fate and not on any particular human being . That is why the benefactor is under an obligation to keep himself entirely out of the benefaction. ” 157 Real charity , then , issues from a detached and pure love , which is to say , from a desire to do what justice demands and thus not only does not necessitate attachment but also absolutely precludes it . For Weil , consenting to distance from the beloved is key to a pure or “ supernatural ” love , one not tarnished by attachment , modification , domination , submission , or the desire for possession . So it is in this context that Rhees makes his third objection , “ If I do not want to be separated from the person I love , this need not mean that I want to possess him ( or her ) . ” 158 He goes on to protest Weil ’ s analogy of this desire for proximity with the miser ’ s love of a treasure , arguing that although the miser may make sacrifices to keep the money , “ he does not make sacrifices for it ; he does not have a love for it in the way in which you love the woman who is yours , and for whom you make every sacrifice. ” 159 In other words , he questions why the desire for proximity would imply a desire for consumption . As we have noted , Weil does often compare love with hunger ; of course , for her , pure love would be evidenced by looking antithetical to eating . Can one , in fact , have a pure love for something that one dares to approach ? Weil thinks that by “ remain [ ing ] quite still ” we actually unite ourselves with that which we desire.160 It is this way with God , for instance : we do not dare approach Him , but paradoxically , by our self-renunciation it is possible to be closest . The approach itself is an assertion of self and suffices to bring one the sort of satiation and consolation that arises from a consumptive posture . Anytime distance is reduced , love ( i.e. , hunger ) is conquered . But this is precisely the danger , for it is the hunger that is real : “ We imagine kinds of food , but the hunger itself is real ; we have to fasten onto the hunger. ” 161 What this means is that as finite , fallible creatures , our remembrance that this is our constitution is of utmost importance . In constantly seeking proximity to the beloved , we ironically forget our essential hunger , for this is the paradoxical nature of desire that Emily Dickinson expresses in the last stanza of her poem , “ I Had Been Hungry ” : “ . . . so I found / that hunger was a way / of persons outside windows , / the entering takes away. ” 162 Though we may not think we wish to possess the beloved we approach , the distance is necessary to maintain our humility before , and hence our love for her . Simone Weil is not the only woman to have been criticized for finding her vocation in serving the world beyond and even to the exclusion of , intimate and familial relations . In his fourth critique , Rhees saw in Weil a “ tendency to ignore the relations between two persons . . . which are the relations of just these individuals ” and thereby to ignore the suffering that would be inherent therein.163 Care ethicists , such as Nel Noddings , are also highly suspicious of notions like “ universal love ” because of the propensity toward abstraction and abstention from the practical world . Noddings worries about the caring that retreats from the tending to particular persons by going . . . toward other objects of caring—ideas , animals , humanity-at-large , God— [ such that ] her ethical ideal is virtually shattered . . . . Our ethic of caring—which has been called a “ feminine ethic ” —begins to look a bit mean in contrast to the masculine ethics of universal love or universal justice . But universal love is illusion . Under the illusion , some young people retreat to the church to worship that which they can not actualize ; some write lovely poetry extolling universal love ; and some , in terrible disillusion , kill to establish the very principles which should have entreated them not to kill . Thus are lost both principles and persons.164 If this neglect of persons is true , can it be justified ? Jane Addams , another social activist of the early twentieth century who felt called to “ higher claims ” argues , by contrast , “ The stern [ ethical ] questions are not in regard to personal and family relations , but did ye visit the poor , the criminal , the sick , and did ye feed the hungry ? ” 165 Addams believed that the two interests , personal and social , did each have a real moral basis and a right to its own place in life ; however , these interests are bound to collide tragically , unless family and close friends are educated to recognize the broader social claim as legitimate . Hence , for Addams , the responsibility lies with the family and the spouse to adjust to the more expansive and inclusive ethic . While Addams argued on the basis of a democratic humanism that “ to attain individual morality in an age demanding social morality . . . is utterly to fail to apprehend the situation , ” 166 as we have seen , Weil explains impersonal attention on a religious basis : in order to truly love those here below , our love must “ detach itself completely from creatures to ascend to God , ” pass “ through God as through fire , ” to then come down again “ associated with the creative love of God. ” 167 As we have pointed out , however , since God can not be a direct object for our love , Weil actually means that we attend to the universal human void which is sacred . She explains : We have a heavenly country , but in a sense it is too difficult to love , because we do not know it ; above all , in a sense , it is too easy to love , because we can imagine it as we please . We run the risk of loving a fiction under this name . . . . Let us love the country of here below . It is real ; it offers resistance to love . It is this country that God has given us to love . He has willed that it should be difficult yet possible to love it.168 Her maddening paradox of the imperative to love what is here below while detaching from its particulars to ascend to a supernatural commonality points to the extraordinary difficulty of resisting idolatry—which we commit either by imagining the supernatural or absolutizing the natural . The orientation of love is , for Weil , as challenging as the proverbial camel who passes through the eye of the needle , or more to the point , “ the rich man [ who enters ] . . . into the kingdom of God. ” When the disciples expressed their dismay at this illustration , wondering how they could then be saved , Jesus responded : “ For mortals it is impossible , but for God all things are possible. ” 169 Weil does not deny the importance of interpersonal relations , for they are essential in avoiding pure abstractions and fictions : “ In all departments of life , love is not real unless it is directed toward a particular object ; it becomes universal without ceasing to be real only as a result of analogy and transference. ” 170 The point is , we ought not to privilege certain relations and persons above others by making exceptions , special excuses , et cetera , because the ego is always involved in such rankings . In addition , such privileging shows that we have fallen under a conceit that select people , concerns , and relations are more real than others . By contrast , our love of a particular person must leave impartiality intact and preserve the autonomy in ourselves and others ; these qualities are of an impersonal order . Weil provides a helpful example to illustrate this transference : “ As a geometrician looks at a particular figure in order to deduce the universal properties of the triangle , so he who knows how to love directs upon a particular human being a universal love. ” 171 This detached love does not diminish the beloved but in fact is like a vision that refuses to be distracted by what is inessential and accidental about a person—the very same qualities that the ego exaggerates and uses as the basis of discrimination . If this detachment brings about resentment and abandonment on the part of our comrades in our personal lives , we can be certain that they “ are no true friends of God , ” Weil remarks.172 “ Our neighbor , [ and ] our friends . . . do not fall to the level of unrealities after the soul has had direct contact with God , ” she continues , distinguishing herself from Plato . “ On the contrary , it is only then that these things become real . Previously they were half dreams . Previously they had no reality. ” 173 So despite Rhees ’ claim that cutting attachment to the world constitutes a flight from responsibility and is evil in its apparent disregard of “ the dependence of other people on you , ” 174 it seems that real justice is possible only through this impersonal attention . The temptation to give preferential treatment to one ’ s closest friends , and to leave the ego intact in doing so , is too great otherwise . It would be uncomfortable for the average human to accept that “ love is not consolation , ” but “ light ” 175 and that loving truth ( which is a mandate ) entails enduring the void . What may be perceived as fleeing responsibility , as disregarding the dependence of others , may in fact be the result of the sort of attachment that should itself become enlightened . We are tempted to label the discomfort and personal neglect we feel from the saint ’ s detachment as evil , but is the evil not in us ? Weil reminds us , “ The sin in me says ‘ I ’ . . . . Evil makes distinctions , prevents God from being equivalent to all. ” 176 Still , are there not other philosophies on love that extol the singular uniqueness of particular persons in relationships as central to the ethicality of the engagement ? Emmanuel Levinas is clearly one such philosopher who , by taking a phenomenological approach to the encounter with the Other , reveals the “ height ” and “ infinity ” ( or vertical dimension ) that manifests in the experience of that irreducible alterity . We generalize here some key points from his work , Totality and Infinity , for the purposes of this contrast to Weilienne love . For Levinas , broadly speaking , it is the encounter with difference or alterity of the Other—the fact that he is irreducible to the Same ( the subject , me ) —that founds the religio-ethical dimension and thus my responsibility for the Other . In fact , “ preexisting the plane of ontology is the ethical plane , ” 177 for Levinas , insofar as relation and encounter are primary , whereas abstraction , systematizing , and totalizing are secondary . In the encounter , the Other comes to me as “ absolutely foreign , ” and this strangeness is the property of his freedom , his distance from me . As Levinas notes , “ The absolutely foreign alone can instruct us . And it is only man who could be absolutely foreign to me—refractory to every typology , to every genus , to every characterology , to every classification . . . . ” 178 While Weil also emphasizes the importance of distance between two persons to preserve autonomy and the capacity for free consent , goodness is only possible in a relation when there is a recognition of what is common in all people—the impersonal hungering . Levinas does say that “ to recognize the Other is to recognize a hunger , ” but he goes on to say , “ To recognize the Other is to give . But it is to give to the master , to the lord , to him whom one approaches as ‘ You ’ in a dimension of height. ” 179 Levinas thus describes the experience of the Other as one of divinity ( or , in his term , “ infinity ” ) . Weil , on the other hand , reserves that level of alterity/mystery for the supernatural—which we only know by its absence . Other persons are limits to us and our projects , but only on the basis of the common link to the good , by virtue of their desire for the good . That is , there is mediation ( exemplified by the Christ figure ) between the immanent and transcendent in Weil ’ s philosophy , whereas , for Levinas , “ [ t ] he dimension of the divine opens forth from the [ particular ] human face ” 180 in an unmediated way . Beyond this difference , we also know that for Levinas , there is a distinction between the ethical dimension and that of the uniquely loving or erotic relationship . In the latter , Levinas describes an ambiguity wherein desire ( a tending toward the absolutely other , characteristic of the ethical relation ) and need ( a tending toward satisfaction and consummation for the self ) are joined . In the loving relationship , that is , Levinas emphasizes the additional element of enjoyment of the Other and , therefore , a return to self in consummatory experiences . He writes of the ambiguity : “ Love remains a relation with the Other that turns into need , and this need still presupposes the total , transcendent exteriority of the other , of the beloved. ” 181 Weil , however , is unequivocal in her denigration of carnal love , but more to the point , she warns of the destructive influence of the element of “ need ” admitted into any friendship or relationship . “ To soil is to modify , it is to touch , ” she says , describing the disfiguring effects of power exerted in any relationship , including the erotic caress.182 And , “ In all human things , necessity is the principle of impurity. ” 183 The problem is precisely that lovers want to possess , to enjoy the Other , to reaffirm the self through the Other . In this light , Levinas ’ description of the ( feminine ) beloved is telling : The beloved is opposed to me not as a will struggling with my own or subject to my own , but on the contrary as an irresponsible animality which does not speak true words . The beloved , returned to the stage of infancy without responsibility—this coquettish head , this youth , this pure life “ a bit silly ” —has quit her status as a person . . . . The relations with the Other are enacted in play ; one plays with the Other as with a young animal.184 While philosophers like Luce Irigaray have been critical of passages in Levinas ’ phenomenology of eros such as this one for primarily feminist reasons , Weil would see the description as indicative of a mind that has given ( in the Platonic sense ) full reign to its basest desires and complete license to the falsifying imagination that projects animality onto the reality of a person . Moreover , according to Levinas ’ description , our love is ultimately defined by its return to us . He writes , “ If to love is to love the love the Beloved bears me , to love is also to love oneself in love , and thus to return to oneself . Love does not transcend unequivocably—it is complacent , it is pleasure and dual egoism. ” 185 In Weil ’ s thinking on love , this is a recipe for domination and constraint within relationships—that is , injustice . The autonomy ( and integrity ) of the Other is compromised by the consumptive aspect of the erotic orientation , for they become a means to my self-love . Hence , for Weil , even “ to desire friendship is a great fault , ” for it is of “ the order of grace ” and should be for us an unexpected and gratuitous joy . “ Friendship is not , ” she contends , “ to be sought , not to be dreamed , not to be desired ; it is to be exercised ( it is a virtue ) . ” 186 This virtue requires the preservation of hunger on our part and the refusal to fill this void with another . In the end , Simone Weil can perhaps be accused of seeking to express and live a love that is not pleasant , a love that is too great for the intellect ’ s grasp , and too detached for the hungry ego . Despite Richard Rhees ’ admitted high regard for Weil and her work , when he says in various places that he thinks Weil is mistaken about love , one wonders whether he is not in actuality wishing ( imagining ) her to be mistaken . Such a desire would be a temptation for anyone . Weil herself recognized the tension that pure love is bound to produce . She knew , for instance , that the testing of Job was “ a question of the level of love. ” 187 The question that must be confronted is : “ Is love situated on the level of sheep , fields of corn , numerous children ? Or is it situated further off , in the third dimension , behind ? ” 188 And Weil did not believe that she would pass this test , either , confessing , “ I think I must love wrongly : otherwise things would not seem like this to me . My love would not be attached to a few beings . It would be extended to everything which is worthy of love. ” 189 This sort of love seems impossible to us , but “ it is necessary to touch impossibility in order to come out of the dream world ” and approach the door of the supernatural , the real.190 In an age where distractions are omnipresent and where self-love is touted as the foundation of all other loves , the dream world appears to be inhabited consciously and willingly . It is no surprise that we do not see whole races of people , whole nations , the poor , and the diseased but primarily direct our “ attention ” toward those who entertain us and who perpetuate our fictional worlds . It is therefore a revolutionary hypothesis that love is the selfless attending to reality . It is in this way , and no other , that love is a condition of justice , for while such love seems impossible to us , it is something we must begin to “ see ” in order to begin seeing those whom our preferential loves have made invisible . But it is in this way , too , that pure love ( and thus , “ real mysticism ” ) is not ennobling or glorious , but crucifying . Perhaps the question Weil leaves in her wake is whether we are prepared to accept a detached , pure , and patient love as the model for our interaction with others . This “ impossible ” love—which for Weil is the only love—may be our greatest ethical and religious challenge , and by virtue of an inherent reference to absolute perfection , an uncomfortable companion for us as well . 5Beauty and anonymity Consider the lilies of the field , how they grow ; they neither toil nor spin , yet I tell you , even Solomon in all his glory was not clothed like one of these . MATTHEW 6:28–9 Space juts out from us and translates each thing : to succeed with a tree ’ s essence cast innerspace around it , out of that space that has its life in you . Surround it with restraint . In itself it has no bounds . Only in the field of your renouncing does it rise as Tree . RAINER MARIA RILKE1 Decentered eye , decentered I While much has just been said about love requiring self-renunciation and subsequent release of control , a more thorough appreciation of Weil ’ s religious paradoxes can be had through examining her ideas on the nature of the beautiful and the disposition proper to its appreciation . As we will see , the development of a certain aesthetic posture inclines us to be just and loving ; this aesthetic posture will be such that in beholding a work of art , for example , we will feel displaced from our imagined centrality in the world , stopped short in our consumptive and egocentric ways . Weil held that any love of beauty will simultaneously be a love of and consent to our inherent limitations in the encounters with what is external to us . But as we will see , the beautiful—especially as embodied in the tragic—will also call us to exceed limits . Recall Weil ’ s claim that “ the beautiful is a carnal attraction which keeps us at a distance and implies a renunciation , ” including a renunciation of the “ most deep-seated ” imagination.2 But in renouncing the imagination , we paradoxically exceed what we thought possible . In this way , we see that the beautiful object acts on us as it structures our mode of being in the world ; at the same time , our disposition will determine what we can appreciate , to such an extent that , as we have shown in the previous chapter , attention is creative . The particular comportment inherent in encountering the beautiful as depicted by Weil is shared by the philosopher Edward Bullough , and we briefly cite his view only to provide some preliminary illumination on Weil ’ s aesthetic philosophy and its relation to the cultivation of attentiveness . According to Bullough , “ the essence of the aesthetic attitude is the psychological process ( or act ) of distancing. ” 3 Any involvement with the aesthetic object that is purely personal or that solely fulfills our practical needs or base desires is decidedly unaesthetic . There is a famous example Bullough gives of this phenomenon , where the jealous husband who , at a performance of Othello , keeps thinking of his own wife ’ s odd behavior , is attending not really to the play as such , but to its relation to his own life . His attitude is not duly “ distanced , ” and is therefore not aesthetic . His involvement in the play is merely personal . . . . [ Or again , ] when one feels delighted by a play merely because his daughter plays a leading role therein ; or by a record of Shahnai music just because it is being played on his stereo , the inner fabric of the play or the music is hardly given any thought , and hence the attitude is not aesthetic.4 What this amounts to is that the object of beauty that makes attention possible ( for Weil tells us , “ [ t ] he beautiful is something on which we can fix our attention , ” 5 ) also potentially permits a great deal of self-obsession . But the fault is not in the work of art , per se , but in our refusal to consent to the experience of hunger arising from the attraction , or void . Any “ good ” that is opened to us via the aesthetic object is revealed only when we are in the posture of looking and not of eating , Weil argues . She even speculates that “ vice , depravity , and crime are nearly always , in their essence , attempts to eat beauty , to eat what we should only look at. ” 6 Eating , of course , is analogous to giving complete license to the self-protecting imagination , that is , inattention . It wants to neutralize potential rupture in advance , to reduce all meaning in accordance with our desires . Whereas to be attentive to the thing of beauty depends upon an initial consent to preserve the void that we want desperately to fill . Crucially , there are certain experiences and manifestations of pure beauty that make the willingness to preserve the void more likely . Before giving attention to two manifestations of beauty that exemplify Weil ’ s aesthetic-religious philosophy—anonymity and tragedy—we will now consider in further detail the aesthetic dimensions of the attentive orientation and their relation to the moral subject . Aesthetic arrest Interestingly , in drawing on the studies of contemporary psychologists such as Andrew McGhie and Michael and Abigail Lipson , we find that , in their view , the antithesis of attention is self-interest or self-orientation , like it is for Weil . McGhie writes , “ Observations of neurotic patients suggest that their poor concentration is due , not to their being easily distracted by extraneous external stimulation . . . but rather to their preoccupation with their own inner problems. ” 7 And Michael and Abigail Lipson explain that “ the rebound from absorbed study to self-concern . . . represents an attentional and . . . a moral lapse . ( It is of course irrelevant whether one ’ s attention to the task recoils to a self-orientation of positive or negative valuation : ‘ I have done well ’ and ‘ I have done badly ’ are ethically equivalent in this sense . ) ” 8 Weil , too , held the view that attention is an orientation directed away from oneself . “ Attention alone—that attention which is so full that the ‘ I ’ disappears—is required of me . I have to deprive all that I call ‘ I ’ of the light of my attention and turn it on to that which can not be conceived. ” 9 “ That which can not be conceived ” here stands for any of the Platonic absolutes , as we have seen—the good , beauty itself , truth , and of course , for Weil , the supernatural/God . The mistake , then , is to treat as absolute temporal phenomena in our hunger for the tangible and immediate , for such gratification conduces to self-obsession . The moment , that is , I begin to neglect the relativity of such objects for the sake of my self and my desire for comfort , I cease to be attentive , and I turn away from the object in its reality and turn toward illusion ( and an illusory self . ) It is not difficult to see that the orientation toward illusion and the orientation toward reality are mutually exclusive and that the lacking of one suggests the presence of the other : so it is with attentiveness and distractedness . These orientations are not entirely determined by their objects , although some objects ( such as expensive and luxurious products ) tend to stimulate the deceitful imagination more easily and conjure illusions about the self more quickly . However , we had also formerly said , in relating Pascal ’ s views on diversion and the influence thereof on Weil ’ s concept of l ’ imagination combleuse , that it is distraction that consists in avoiding oneself and escaping into external stimuli . Recall his statement : “ A king is surrounded by people whose only thought is to divert him and stop him thinking about himself , because , king though he is , he becomes unhappy as soon as he thinks about himself. ” 10 Though seemingly contradictory , these two theories ( the psychologists ’ and Pascal ’ s ) on attention are actually complementary . When the inattentive person is absorbed with him/herself , it is the imaginary or false idea of a reified self that is the object of fixation . The true self ( mediocre , limited , porous , incontinent , mortal—in short , the void ) inspires fear and disgust , such that even the king seeks to be disturbed , as Pascal says . And Weil points out that one can not be truly self-centered , given the nature of the self : “ If we could be egoistical it would be very pleasant . It would be a rest . But literally we can not . ” 11 We can not truly love ourselves , according to Weil , because of our finitude , experienced as wretchedness . However , this inability to be an egoist , while exposing this humiliated nature , is also the source of our “ greatness , ” in that this should compel us to attention , to look beyond ourselves . Furthermore , attention , while being decidedly not self-concerned , is reflective of the attending subject in a way that avoids dishonesty , illusions , and imaginings of royalty . Consider Weil ’ s metaphor of the painter : A painter doesn ’ t draw the place where he himself is . But looking at his painting , I know his position in relation to the things he has drawn . On the contrary , if he represents himself in his painting , I know with certainty that the place he shows himself to be isn ’ t the one where he is.12 In other words , if we make ourselves the object of our focus , we will of necessity represent ourselves ( to us and to others ) wrongly . Thus , distractedness and the workings of the imagination not only permit but also sustain illusion , reification , objectification of others , thoughtless consumption , and desecration of the beautiful . However , the basis for the attentive orientation , as we have seen already , is rooted in a divine model , the source of transcendent inspiration . This model is unrepresentable , except by analogy . Any good artist , therefore , imitates divine creation via decreation : “ In creating a work of art of the highest class the artist ’ s attention is oriented towards silence and the void ; from this silence and void there descends an inspiration which develops into words or forms. ” 13 Salomé Voegelin eloquently confirms this idea : “ When there is nothing to hear , so much starts to sound . Silence is not the absence of sound but the beginning of listening. ” 14 As attention and decreation are inextricably joined together , our attentiveness , being creative in its renunciation , makes it more likely that others will see reality as well . In the transparency that attention manifests , we not only become an impersonal reader of reality , without perspective , but we also cease to be the obscurity ( which having a personal perspective brings ) that serves as a distraction to other beings . If we carry Weil ’ s description of attention to its fullest extent , we will see how , in being inattentive , we actively contribute to the culture of distraction : this is the sense in which we alter reality , but we alter it for the worse ; we are not creating but destroying : Not to recognize and accept this impossibility of creating is the source of many an error . We are obliged to imitate the act of creation , and there are two possible imitations—the one real and the other apparent—preserving and destroying . There is no trace of “ I ” in the act of preserving . There is in that of destroying . The “ I ” leaves its mark on the world as it destroys.15 Thus , in giving in to distraction and noise , to the orientation of “ eating ” and consolation , we leave new blemishes on the world . We also become increasingly banal and “ looking ” becomes more and more difficult the more we a-void . In such cases , we enter into a vicious downward spiral of objectification—of ourselves and of others—which is to say idolatry . Distractedness is then , beyond being idolatrous , unoriginal and the antithesis of any truly aesthetic orientation . For by being an orientation that brings only idols into view , distractedness is a determinate orientation toward escape , comfort , and the familiar . Attention , however , is an orientation that reveals to us not only our own degradation but also the general complexities , subtleties , details , and nuances of life , which go unperceived in a typical self-centered state . Attention is therefore experienced as an asymmetrical and imbalanced orientation . The two ways of being obedient—to mechanical necessity ( distractedness ) or to God/love/the void ( attentiveness ) —implicate the very constitution and moral fabric of our beings . We become different sorts of creatures in either becoming opaque and impermeable to the world in our distraction ( like “ a stone that falls ” 16 ) or transparent and porous in our attention . In becoming attentive , we are not only able to see what is external to us , in all its reality , but we are also able to know the reality of ourselves : our mediocrity , our finitude , our vulnerability to moral gravity , and , finally , our nothingness in the sense of the void . Here is the crucial and paradoxical point : without attention , part of the reality we can not realize is our own distractedness , which is to say , we do not realize our own tendency to avoid the real , our moral “ gravity , ” and , therefore , our own imprisonment to the natural attitude . As noted earlier , Weil describes these orientations of distractedness and attentiveness as postures of “ eating ” and “ looking , ” respectively . “ Here below , ” Weil writes , “ to look and to eat are two different things . We have to choose one or the other . . . . The only people who have any hope of salvation are those who occasionally stop and look for a time , instead of eating. ” 17 Are there conditions that assist us in this “ stopping ” ? Plato underscored the effects of the beautiful as unique and essential to the good life : a trembling and reverential restraint of greedy impulses in remembrance of the divine . But what can rightfully be characterized as beautiful ? How do we make this discernment ? Does Weil give us any clues as to what could have an ennobling effect on the perceiver ? What has the potential to cultivate our aesthetic-ethical-religious attention ? Weil writes that if we project our evil upon “ something perfectly pure , ” 18 then that object can not be defiled , and will not reflect the evil back on us , but instead will effect a transubstantiation , delivering us from evil . But we rightly wonder what that “ something ” is . “ That which is perfectly pure can be nothing other than God present in the world , ” Weil elaborates , including such things in this category as “ sacred objects , ” “ sacred texts ” ( such as the Lord ’ s Prayer ) , “ the beauty of nature when looked at for itself , ” and sometimes human beings and works of art.19 Looking in particular at works of art , then , the first thing we must recognize is that sometimes they are perfectly pure . In what sense , then , is art an incarnation of the supernatural , for Weil ? Any work of art , or in general anything that could be called truly “ beautiful , ” to serve as an object of attention , will necessarily remind those who contemplate it of their inherent hunger , their void . Weil clearly sees that certain objects , in their transcendent beauty , do have an ennobling effect upon the psyches of the beholders . For example , from her lectures we find : “ Architecture : a child , as a matter of instinct , does not play around in a cathedral , ” for “ what is beautiful takes hold of the body. ” 20 This statement suggests the seeming impossibility of distractedness—even for a child—in the presence of a work that , in its own way , is a moral exemplar . Like an exemplar , the cathedral has a concrete and transformative effect on those who would open themselves to it . Weil tells us that beauty “ teaches us that mind can come down into nature . Morality itself tells us to act according to thoughts that are true . [ But ] beauty is a witness that the ideal can become a reality. ” 21 Additionally , since attention can ( by definition ) only be directed toward what is real , there is , in Weil ’ s philosophy as with Plato , an identification of the beautiful and the real . On this note , Miklos Vetö remarks , “ Obviously this identity does not mean that the beautiful is something of the order of substance , hypostatized ; the real , as we know , is only the network of necessity limiting and organizing the material world. ” He goes on to explain that the presence of necessity in the world is a harmony , or “ order of the world. ” Hence , “ everything that is , is beautiful , since all is in harmony with the will of God. ” 22 ( Note : “ Everything that is ” refers to nature , that is , God ’ s creation , but not necessarily to human artifice and fabrication ; thus , artworks that do not reflect the order of the world will not , for Weil , be considered beautiful . ) Weil does use the terms “ order of the world ” and “ beauty of the world ” interchangeably ; but what is meant by necessity , and how is it relevant to cultivating the attention ? There are two aspects of “ necessity , ” according to Weil . One is that it is “ exercised , ” and the other is that it is “ endured. ” If “ the sun shines on the just and the unjust , ” then the two aspects are symbolized by “ the sun and the cross , ” she writes.23 When one comes to realize that these two elements—as different as they may seem—are merely different sides of the same coin ( of necessity ) , one can come to appreciate as beautiful those necessary relations that comprise the universe . The nature of necessity , then , suffices to keep us at a distance , for “ the sun that shines on the just and the unjust ” is an indifferent , impersonal one and does not foster attachments . The impersonality of the order of the world has the same effect upon humans as the many challenging disciplines in school have upon a schoolboy who prefers only one subject , and it has the same effect as the cycle of agricultural labor does on the farmer , who may often feel like a hamster inside a wheel at the end of each year . Therefore , in contemplating the order of the world as beautiful , there is a reticence , a withholding , a noticeable absence . Beauty , as Ann Pirruccello notes , always arouses a longing for finality.24 And Weil agrees with Kant , who said that beauty “ is a finality which involves no objective . . . no good except itself , in its totality , as it appears to us. ” 25 We desire beauty , but when we try to possess it , we realize we still desire something , and we have no idea what that is . Thus , we are tantalized because we are given nothing that is tangible , and we do not get a sense of consummation or satisfaction from the finality of beauty . The artist , too , can have no particular intention in art , as this would be reflective of his own will . “ The poet who puts in a certain particular word for a certain particular effect is a mediocre poet. ” 26 Art calls for our decreation , whether we are the onlooker or the artist . Weil references Eve , as a negative example , who “ caused humanity to be lost by eating the fruit ” and argues that the contrary posture , of looking without eating , would logically be our salvation.27 As Pirruccello puts it : This kind of good that attracts us without giving us anything tangible ensures that the experience of beauty arouses our feeling of incompleteness , and while enjoying the good that beauty does provide , we can not help being referred to an absent goodness , an impossible goodness of which we possess no idea.28 This paradox of “ presence and absence ” in attending to the beautiful , as Pirruccello articulates it , or of revelation and reticence , is what maintains the appetite in relation to it , or the void . We will examine two types of aesthetic phenomena that stimulate , but do not fill , this void : the anonymous or “ bland ” art that enshrines the impersonal and the tragic . Anonymous and bland Weil writes that priests , if they are following their sacred duty , will emulate the saints , “ principally the one veritable saint , who is Christ ” 29 and thereby be inspired to convey more goodness than they themselves are capable of . She worries , however , that writers and artists—as a result of the Enlightenment mentality—champion self-reliance and personality and increasingly produce work that is excessively psychological and subjective . Perhaps for this reason , T. S. Eliot asserts that great literature ( and we may extend this to art in general ) must be impersonal and universal , and explains : “ The author . . . is trying to affect us wholly , as human beings , whether he knows it or not ; and we are affected by it , as human beings , whether we intend to be or not. ” 30 How are we affected by art in which the author has become nearly invisible , like an anonymous translator ? It would seem that the more “ impersonal ” the art is , the less likely it is to be appropriated as fuel for egoistic endeavors . For instance , it is difficult to personalize something like Gregorian music and this may explain Weil ’ s penchant for it : “ A person who is passionately fond of music may quite well be a perverted person—but I should find it hard to believe this of anyone who thirsted for Gregorian chanting. ” 31 In addition , in Medieval Byzantine iconography such as “ Christ the Pantocrator , ” expressionism and indeed , expressions in the sacred face were discouraged due to their potential for arresting the observer at the superficial level of the representation and thus leading to idolatry . The icons themselves were to be “ anonymous , ” and the artists were to refrain from investing their personalities in them or even signing them.32 As Richard Kearney tells us , [ T ] he beholder was not inclined to ask , “ Who painted it ? ” or to exclaim , “ What superb artistry ! What beautiful facial features ! What originality of expression and technique ! ” . . . Indeed the common practice of portraying the eyes of Christ as expressionless was an apt symbol of the icon ’ s primary function : to invite the onlooker to travel through the vacant regard of the image towards the suprasensible transcendence of God . . . . In other words , the theocentric quality of the icon was evident in the fact that every effort was made to eschew worshipping the image itself so as to worship God through the image . The makers and beholders of icons were not to follow their own fancies but to harness their imaginations to the sacred visual types laid down by age-old tradition.33 In contrast to this theocentric value , the modern practice of expressionistic self-portraiture epitomized by Vincent Van Gogh naturally exemplified an anthropocentric and humanistic trend . And later , the Marilyn Monroe serigraphs created by Andy Warhol as well as Martin Sharp ’ s “ Pop Poster of Van Gogh ” convey the “ undecidable status ” and “ ambiguity ” inherent in postmodern parodies . As Kearney puts it , “ Our inability to definitively place Sharp ’ s poster parody on the side of ‘ art ’ or ‘ pseudo-art ’ is itself an indication of its postmodern character . . . . [ It ] differs fundamentally in that it does not seek to direct the onlooker ’ s attention toward some transcendent being but mischievously exults in its role as a playful item of popular consumption. ” 34 Weil might argue that this preeminent “ value ” of postmodern art and the postmodern psyche amounts to a destructive nihilism . She is certainly very critical of genres that embrace a relativistic spirit and make a mockery of the notion of aesthetic standards and a hierarchy of values . She sees Dadaism and surrealism , for instance , as representing “ the intoxication of total license , the intoxication in which the mind wallows when it has made a clean sweep of value and surrendered to the immediate. ” 35 While neglecting the power and potential for domination inherent in a definitive set of standards for aesthetic judgment , Weil perceives the greatest threat to be the “ absence of value ” and “ non-oriented thought , ” such that these art movements are the equivalent , to her , of the destruction of towns and human lives.36 Humans , she thinks , are naturally hungry for the good , and the denial of this original orientation and desire effects a perversion of the human spirit . Arguably , in addition to “ the total absence of value as [ the ] supreme value , ” 37 our contemporary popular aesthetic is characterized by extreme triteness and explicit “ personality , ” which has the paradoxical effect of making it simultaneously attractive and forgettable . In fact , it has been argued that this pop art dominating our culture brings about a real decrease in the attentiveness of the beholders . For instance , Theodor Adorno in his essay , “ On the Fetish Character in Music and the Regression of Listening , ” notes the ways in which mass music is reified through “ formulas ” and “ standardizations ” that are not based on criteria of musical proficiency , for instance , but only on what will guarantee commercial success . Ironically , however , given the commercial success , such music must be “ apprehended in a distracted manner. ” 38 He tells us that the listeners typically show a preference for the individual instrumental colors as such . This preference is promoted by the practice of American popular music whereby each variation , or “ chorus , ” is played with emphasis on a special instrumental color , with the clarinet , the piano , or the trumpet as quasi-soloist . This often goes so far that the listener seems to care more about treatment and “ style ” than about the otherwise indifferent material , but with the treatment validating itself only in particular enticing effects . Along with the attraction to color as such , there is of course the veneration for the tool and the drive to imitate and join in the game ; possibly also something of the great delight of children in bright colors , which returns under the pressure of contemporary musical experience.39 Indeed , on several occasions , Adorno describes the contemporary listener who craves the so-called colorful and exciting and new ( but which is actually completely familiar ) as childish and undeveloped.40 For example , he tells us , “ There is actually a neurotic mechanism of stupidity in [ contemporary ] listening , too ; the arrogantly ignorant rejection of everything unfamiliar is its sure sign . Regressive listeners behave like children . Again and again and with stubborn malice , they demand the one dish they have once been served. ” 41 Moreover , it is characteristic of “ infantile hearing ” that it demands “ sensually rich and full sonority ” as well as “ the most comfortable and fluent resolutions. ” 42 In this preference , there is distaste for the unexpected and for any dissonance that causes tension . According to him , this is because such music is unable to be reified and assimilated into the listener ’ s identity . In the context of the ubiquitous commodity , the listener feels she has no choice but to succumb to this paradigm of objectification . Adorno explains , The type of relationship suggested by the billboard , in which masses make a commodity recommended to them the object of their own action , is in fact found again as the pattern for the reception of light music . They need and demand what has been palmed off on them . They overcome the feeling of impotence that creeps over them in the face of monopolistic production by identifying themselves with the inescapable product.43 But again , there is the ironic effect of this sort of aesthetic in its requirement that we become distracted and forgetful : “ Just as every advertisement is composed of the inconspicuous familiar and the unfamiliar conspicuous , so the hit song remains salutarily forgotten in the half-dusk of its familiarity. ” 44 Significantly , then , the preference for “ style ” and “ color ” does not awaken a taste for truly new colors or sonorities . Instead , “ the atomistic listeners are the first to denounce such [ truly new ] sonorities as ‘ intellectual ’ or absolutely dissonant , ” Adorno warns us.45 And furthermore , the “ hit song ” with its immediate sense of vibrancy can not be attended to ; it is responsible for the creation of “ deconcentration ” in listeners . As Adorno contends , If the standardized products , hopelessly like one another except for conspicuous bits such as hit lines , do not permit concentrated listening without becoming unbearable to the listeners , the latter are in any case no longer capable of concentrated listening . . . . Again and again one encounters the judgment that [ such music ] is fine for dancing but dreadful for listening.46 Because contemporary industrialized society has developed a taste ( albeit self-defeating ) for those “ debased cultural goods , ” which are reified , packaged , commodified , and ultimately , had , we crave that which is well-defined and easily identified ( but without real standard ) , which has a dominant taste or chorus , and which can then be violently expected , demanded , appropriated , and repeated endlessly . This amounts to a regression from listening , and thus from attention , and thus from openness to subtlety , complexity , nuance , and possibility . But there is art that precludes this fetishization and all of its consequences . Even Adorno notes , “ A Beethoven symphony as a whole , spontaneously experienced , can never be appropriated. ” 47 But what is it about the Beethoven symphony that resists appropriation ? To avoid idolatry , degradation , and the inevitable “ regression of listening ” that accompanies pop art , Weil contends that a supernatural aesthetic that engenders tension , humility , and attentiveness is required . This aesthetic is primarily characterized by impersonality and will be , following Weil ’ s terms , a sign of genius and genuine novelty . After offering a synthesis of Weil ’ s thoughts on this supernatural aesthetic and its relation to these traits , we will show that this aesthetics has a complementary counterpart in the aesthetic of “ blandness ” in classical Chinese philosophies . By elaborating upon Weil ’ s ideas through examining the insights of François Jullien with regard to blandness in classical Chinese aesthetics , we will demonstrate the broader context from which this sort of beauty can be approached and sensed , and its effects on people who partake of it . However , in attending to the complementary aesthetics of the bland , we are also drawn out of a tempting ethno- and religio-centrism in acknowledging a religious aesthetics that proceeds from “ elsewhere , ” from “ beyond the European sphere , ” 48 and thereby hope to reflect Weil ’ s own ecumenicalism , even if it is at times troubled . “ The supernatural , ” as we have seen in the preceding chapters , figures as a prominent part of Weil ’ s thought . However , it is notoriously difficult to define and even her allusions to its role in human existence are unsatisfying to one who would seek to grasp it as a philosophical concept . Metaphorically speaking , it does not exhibit a “ strong flavor ” ; if it itself is not subtle , it is at least subtly referred to . But given what we can say of it , “ indirection ” and “ flavorlessness ” may be the most apt descriptors . For instance , Weil frequently compares the supernatural to “ light , ” 49 something intangible but equally illuminating . Moreover , there is actually good reason for it being conceptually elusive : Weil writes , “ The object of our search should not be the supernatural , but the world . The supernatural is light itself : If we make an object of it , we lower it. ” 50 Therefore , what we find in examining Weil ’ s thoughts on the supernatural is a sense , an aesthetic attitude , conveyed through examples and metaphors of “ perfect beauty ” in the world . The transcendent thing of perfect beauty , which has the capacity to move the soul upward past pandemonium—and is the only thing that can do this—but which also has the capacity to lower us in humility “ by a movement in which gravity plays no part , ” 51 will present itself as universal and eternal , but for this reason will go unnoticed by most and be considered “ unremarkable. ” In recalling some of her concrete examples of perfect beauty and justice ( e.g. , the Gregorian chants , Bach , Romanesque architecture , Antigone ) , the three values of the impersonal , the genius , and the new will be revealed as foundational to this particular aesthetic . To understand how a beautiful thing is impersonal , we must consider Weil ’ s identification of five sub-traits of impersonality in aesthetics . First , there is duration . “ One does not grow tired of beauty , ” whereas “ one does grow tired of what is pleasing , of what only flatters the senses , ” Weil claims.52 The beautiful is something one can attend to for hours ; anything that falls short of this ( such as the statues in the Luxembourg , for her ) is unendurable and demands either that we look away , or that we eliminate the offense.53 Second , there is purity : beauty does give a “ pure pleasure , ” a pleasure absolutely distinct from the one that arises from and encourages consumption . This is why real beauty “ captivates the flesh ” and stills the child in us “ in order to obtain permission to pass right to the soul. ” 54 So while the beautiful is a “ carnal attraction , ” it “ keeps us at a distance ” and demands that we renounce our falsifying imaginations.55 Third , there is the element of infinity . That is , there can be no comparisons in the realm of absolute beauty ; to think in terms of “ better ” or “ worse ” or any matter of degree suggests that the work is not truly beautiful , for the beautiful is the incarnation of God in matter . Fourth , there must be no element of flattery , for there can be no elevation of the ego in attending to the beautiful . Finally , as we have seen already , impersonality implies universality . Michel Sourisse notes , “ Art of the first order always finds its source of inspiration and its model in the contemplation of the universe . Gregorian chant does not escape this law. ” 56 Indeed , for Weil , the Gregorian chant epitomizes the beautiful , perhaps surprisingly , because of its “ share of monotony. ” This beautiful monotony , as opposed to a mechanical monotony of factory work or of the clock , finds its model in the “ perfect regularity of the sky ’ s revolutions that permits the rhythm of agricultural work , the only work that puts us directly in contact with the universe. ” 57 Taken collectively , these five sub-traits constitute what we are calling the impersonal nature of Weilienne aesthetics . This quality that suffuses the Gregorian chants and the Romanesque architecture is , like the Medieval Byzantine iconography , significantly effaced and anonymous so that the object itself does not become the fixation ( or idol ) but instead serves as a vehicle for divine manifestation . The art , like the exemplar , should be empty of personality and in this sense , given the world ’ s standards , may be quite “ unremarkable ” on one level . But ironically enough , impersonality allows beauty to “ cry out. ” This crying out is a crucial function of true art , for between beauty , truth , and justice , only beauty has a voice . Weil writes , “ [ Beauty ] cries out and points to truth and justice who are dumb , like a dog who barks to bring people to his master lying unconscious in the snow. ” 58 The impersonality permits this voice ( and moreover , its efficacy ) because it is what is sacred and perfect in a human being . Anything that issues from the impersonal is compelling and urgent because it is inherently connected to the rest of humanity ; it is not a narrow interest , a personal protest . This is not a utilitarian observation ; the difference in the impersonal and the personal is not one of numbers but is a metaphysical and experiential difference . It is the difference between seeing our proper place in the grand scheme of things and thinking that we are the center of the world . With the latter , our creations may be “ glorious and dazzling achievements . . . which can make a man ’ s name live for thousands of years . But above this level , ” Weil continues , “ far above , separated by an abyss , is the level where the highest things are achieved . These things are essentially anonymous. ” 59 Again , the “ highest things ” may in fact receive little to no attention from the public whose tastes , as Adorno notes , have been trained for the same childish dish , disguised in different dressings . But Weil is keen on this tendency and , understanding the inevitable egoism in artists that accompanies the admiration from the collective , sharply remarks that “ it is precisely those artists and writers who are most inclined to think of their art as the manifestation of their personality who are in fact the most in bondage to public taste. ” 60 The other artists , who create from the springs of the impersonal , and who therefore practice the form of attention that is possible only in solitude , apart from the collectivity , are considered men and women of genius , for Weil . Their works , unlike those of their colleagues just mentioned , have real duration : “ The works of authentic genius from past ages remain , and are available to us . Their contemplation is the everflowing source of an inspiration which may legitimately guide us ” and “ make us grow wings to overcome gravity. ” 61 The genius , unlike the man/woman of talent , embodies “ the supernatural virtue of humility in the domain of thought. ” 62 This is why the inarticulate village idiot , if he loves truth , is closer to genius than the intelligent and linguistically adept person who is proud of his intelligence and talent . Weil says that this pride is analogous to the pride of a condemned man in relation to his large cell.63 Although the art of the genius is imbued with humility and hence an elevating power , the ascension of the soul is paradoxically due to contact with real gravity that is then transmitted by the pen , or the paintbrush , or the instrument of the artist . As Weil says , “ [ The geniuses ] give us . . . something equivalent to the actual density of the real , that density which life offers us every day but which we are unable to grasp because we are amusing ourselves with lies. ” 64 The artistic genius is fully committed to revealing , and not obscuring , harsh reality . For this reason , his/her personality must be absent from the creation and the creative process . Weil gives the example , “ If a child is doing a sum and does it wrong , the mistake bears the stamp of his personality . If he does the sum exactly right , his personality does not enter into it at all. ” 65 Our tendency , wanting to be gods ourselves , is to fictionalize , rather than to transmit a truth transparently . We embellish , we refashion , “ we do not study other people ; we invent what they are thinking , saying , and doing. ” 66 But we go even farther , as we have seen , in completely reversing values “ so that evil is attractive and good is tedious. ” 67 And this tedium should not be understood as being synonymous with the “ beautiful monotony ” that characterizes the Gregorian chants . Whereas the latter has a universal and transcendent nature and is complete with finality , tedium is comparable to the “ mechanical monotony ” that lacks harmony and finds itself in the reign of necessity with no end . In fact , of course , it is such mechanistic evil that is old , uncreative , and repetitive , while goodness and beauty are new and resist arbitrary rules . Art can be genuinely new only when it is suffused with the supernatural , which is external to us and beyond our control . One may be tempted to think that because of its impersonality ( which includes universality ) , ideal beauty would be static and hence expected . Yet this ignores the aspect of infinity that describes transcendent art : its potential for forms of manifestation is by definition limitless . Weil writes , “ Nothing is so beautiful and wonderful , nothing is so continually fresh and surprising , so full of sweet and perpetual ecstasy , as the good. ” 68 This is because “ necessity as strong as gravity ” condemns us to evil ; it is all-too-natural . What is unexpected is to discover a person who is able to resist gravity . The forms and manifestations of baseness are finite , for they issue from the finite ( i.e. , from us ) . So the artist , if she is to create something that can be called “ beautiful , ” must become transparent to allow the light of the divine to shine through . Recall that this is because “ matter is not beautiful when it obeys man , but only when it obeys God . If sometimes a work of art seems almost as beautiful as the sea , the mountains , or flowers , it is because the light of God has filled the artist. ” 69 As we know , for Weil , the most precious and surprising gifts are obtained by waiting on them , not by effort of the will and self-assertion , though the period of training is necessary : “ The weeds are pulled up by the muscular effort of the peasant , but only sun and water can make the corn grow. ” 70 In renouncing ourselves , we simultaneously renounce our mediocrity and are raised by attention ; we become new . Thus it is that these three attributes of the Weilienne aesthetic—the impersonal , along with the genius and the new—describe both the artist and the art . But we are left with the phenomenological question : What is the sense of this impersonal aesthetic ? How does it give itself to me ? Answering these questions becomes all the more problematic when one reads , “ Beauty always promises , but never gives anything ; it stimulates hunger but has no nourishment for the part of the soul which looks in this world for sustenance. ” 71 Weil has herself characterized the beautiful Gregorian chants as “ monotonous , ” but for reasons already mentioned , this description is problematic . There is , we think , a perfect descriptor in the notion of blandness which we find quite naturally in another cultural context—that of ancient China ( and in particular , the Confucian and Taoist traditions ) . “ The flavor of [ the ] waters is bland , but , in fact , it is not bland , it is the best flavor in the world , with which the flavor of no other food can compare . Naturally , ‘ those who can appreciate the flavor of food ’ are already quite ‘ rare , ’ but those who can appreciate the flavor of water are even more so , ” François Jullien writes.72 In studying the ancient Confucian and Taoist traditions of China , Jullien has observed the underlying theme of dan—blandness—which significantly links various art forms ( landscape paintings , music , literature , the culinary arts ) to societal mores , notions of virtue , and religious values . On one level , the virtue of blandness lies in its inherent impartiality and “ non-differentiation. ” He writes , “ As long as no one flavor attracts us more than any other , and one is not favored more than another , we maintain an equal balance among all the virtual forces at work . . . Preference alone is the source of trouble. ” 73 In this sense , blandness reveals its Taoist roots , where singling out one “ side ” ( or in this case , “ flavor ” ) sets up competition , strife , and enmity . But we might also consider Weil ’ s interpretation of the “ lilies of the field that neither toil nor spin ” in this regard . For her , the important point is that “ they have not set out to clothe themselves in this or that color ; they have not exercised their will or made arrangements to bring about their object , ” 74 and in this way , they are an image of docility and impersonality that we are to emulate . Or consider the virtue of blandness in its impartiality ( characterized as “ impersonality ” ) of the Weilienne God who is the ultimate example for humans , who “ maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good , and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust. ” 75 So , on one level , rather than blandness being a deficiency , it may well prove to be a positive virtue that enables detachment and reveals “ the path of free , unimpeded growth , the path of what happens spontaneously. ” 76 Only a person ’ s blandness would allow one to be truly open and attentive and to move in harmony with the fluctuations of the world . Interestingly , though , Jullien finds this value contrary to Christian revelation , arguing in fact that blandness places us “ at the point furthest from [ Christ ’ s ] Revelation. ” He reminds us of Christ ’ s injunction to the disciples to be “ the salt of the earth , ” and to always remember that if salt has lost its savor , it is “ to be cast out , and to be trodden under foot of men. ” 77 He goes on to note that in the Christian tradition , “ salt is a sacred condiment and at the same time the mark of difference—even of categorical opposition. ” 78 At first glance , this analysis appears correct , especially if we consider the quality of the new that is supposed to characterize Weil ’ s Christian understanding of the beautiful and the good . But if we understand “ distinctive ” and “ flavorful ” in this sense of the new , then the problem appears to dissolve . For that which is new in the Weilienne conception does not derive from the individual , as Jullien insinuates , but is always already present in the supernatural , or the Tao . When he concludes , then , that in the Chinese aesthetic , “ reality projects no meaning beyond itself ” and “ blandness characterizes the real in a way that is complete , positive , and natural , ” 79 we may say the same for the Weilienne God , who is synonymous with reality and hence is also final . On another level , blandness is analyzed as having inherent duration , both over the span of history and also within an individual ’ s memory . Jullien describes the phenomenon of bland music and how it gives itself to the listener : The most beautiful music—the music that affects us most profoundly—does not , as is mentioned at the beginning , consist of the fullest possible exploitation of all the different tones . The most intensive sound is not the most intense : by overwhelming our senses , by manifesting itself exclusively and fully as a sensual phenomenon , sound delivered to its fullest extent leaves us with nothing to anticipate , nothing to look forward to.80 At this point , Jullien notes that such explicitly sensorial music fills us “ to the brim ” and satisfies the metaphorical hunger for beauty . Immediately , Weil and Adorno come to mind : Weil , who warns against the sensation of satiety , for it is an illusion ( we are empty ! ) ; the truly beautiful will “ promise ” but “ not give anything. ” And Adorno , who in discussing music himself , acknowledges the dangers of its fetishization , which permits its gluttonous consumption and promotes a hypocritical “ deconcentration. ” Moreover , the preference for “ instrumental colors ” is a symptom of reification , according to him . Jullien would agree with both : In contrast , the least fully rendered sounds are the most promising , in that they have not been fully expressed , externalized , by the instrument in question . . . And it is thus that they manage to sustain . . . a “ lingering ” or a “ leftover ” tone . Such sounds are all the more able to extend and deepen themselves in the minds of their hearers for having not been definitively realized ; and so they retain something more for later deployment and keep something secret and virtual within . In short , they remain heavy with promise . . . Music such as this stays on in the spirit and “ is not forgotten. ” 81 The “ lingering ” or “ leftover ” flavor is precious precisely because it evokes “ a potential , inexhaustible value , ever more desirable as it continues to avert its own consumption , ” Jullien continues.82 However , “ what detracts from strong flavors such as brine or vinegar is that they are fully encompassed by their identification as distinct flavors—the salty and the sour , respectively—rather than evolving into something beyond themselves. ” 83 Is there any better way to characterize and illustrate the brute illogic of egoism , of self-centeredness , here writ as possessing “ strong flavors ” and in the writings of Weil referred to as manifesting “ personality ” ? The bland , though , as opposed to the full exploitation of sound or taste or sight , suffices to bring us , according to Jullien , “ to a subtler and more fundamental grasp of reality. ” 84 We are recalled , that is , from our state of dispersion , distraction , and deconcentration , to a land of “ shared and discreet simplicity ” 85 where the artistic geniuses , rather than trying to outdo one another , work side by side in tearing the veil from the world as it is . What is revealed is unexpected and elusive , and at times , difficult to discern , and even more difficult to swallow . But it is also unforgettable for these reasons . Tragedy and the breach While Weil often emphasizes that beautiful art must be impersonal , “ essentially anonymous , ” implying a renunciation of self and of the consumptive posture , she also recognizes that “ greatness in our times must take a different course ” than classical geniuses and artists such as Leonardo da Vinci or Bach . She hints that art in our time will only be reborn “ from amidst a general anarchy , ” and that it will be a solitary endeavor , with no “ echo. ” 86 In our context , arguably , beauty might then emerge through means that are “ out of order , ” or are even explicitly illegal . Beauty , for Weil , is the attractive , magnetic aspect of justice and truth , and as the latter are oftentimes at odds with societal norms and systems , it is easy to see why the beautiful may be quite disruptive on a social level , and traumatic on an individual level . In this sense , as Katherine Brueck puts it , “ For Weil . . . the magnetic power of the beautiful bears a tragic cast. ” 87 Indeed , the encounter with the tragic in art arouses our desire for seemingly impossible goodness . But it disturbs us . Tragedy reminds us of the splinter at the core of human existence that we habitually patch over and ignore , and so it does not bring consolation . Iris Murdoch tells us that “ it is the height of art to be able to show what is nearest , what is deeply and obviously true but usually invisible. ” 88 For Weil , too , the true artist sees what is invisible and hears what is muffled to the collective and neatly managed by the bureaucracies ; thus , she sees/hears the marginalized , the afflicted , the abject , and the “ monsters ” who exist at the limits that the rest of us refuse to acknowledge consciously . In this way , the tragic artist grasps suffering intimately ( and for this reason may be considered “ mad , ” to recall our discussion of divine mania ) . But tragedy is not the same as sorrow , and the artist does not attempt to manipulate facile emotions in her audience by conjuring up clichéd images of pain and suffering . In fact , it is notoriously difficult to capture and compose tragedy . Murdoch writes : The tragic art form is rare because it is difficult to keep attention focused on the truth without the author slipping into an easier sentimental , abstract , melodramatic ( and so on ) mode . . . . Tragedy is a paradoxical art because to succeed it must really upset us while exhibiting , but not as mere consolation , some orderly and comprehensive vista of evil and catastrophe . Death threatens the ego ’ s dream of eternal life and happiness and power . Tragedy , like religion , must break the ego , destroying the illusory whole of the unified self.89 Weil would add on to this description that works created by tragic artists are not simply “ clever ” or born of “ talent ” ; like the impersonal artists , they are genius , but the tragedians and their works are genius because of an intimacy with affliction that nevertheless is not a presentation of their personal experience , but a result of a self-effacing attention : The nobleness of suffering is not to be spoken of lightly or too often ; it can too easily become mere literature in the mouth of people who have not suffered pain that can break the very soul . Do you realize there are millions and millions of people on earth who suffer nearly always , from birth to death ? It is a pity they [ have been deprived of ] expression ; they would say the truth about suffering . . . The most beautiful poetry is the poetry which can best express , in its truth , the life of people who can ’ t write poetry . Outside of that there is only clever poetry ; and mankind can do very well without clever poetry.90 Such truthful representations of suffering are indeed rare , but they exist . As Weil notes , the great paradox is that the afflicted , the victims of the greatest injustices , are often least able to communicate these truths . But they have perhaps the greatest potential to rupture our banal experiences and force us to reflect upon the very inattentiveness that has resulted in such injustices . However , even here there is no guarantee of that revelation or the ensuing transformation . For example , as Cornel West has pointed out , blues music—manifestations of the pain of oppression black people have suffered for centuries , tinged with impossible hope—has frequently been annexed as hip background music in upper-class white living rooms during dinner parties , deprived of its tension , tragedy , and real significance in this use.91 This appropriation is certainly an instance of inattention and is therefore unjust . Unfortunately , it is only one of countless examples of such cultural colonization of which the privileged and the powerful have been guilty . Following Adorno ’ s line of thinking , the tragic , not surprisingly , tempts those who are “ centered ” to neutralize it by commercializing it and therefore prevent against its subversive potential . Through the mill of the culture industry , we see only simulations of human crisis . Sophocles ’ Antigone is a tragic play that greatly inspired Weil and influenced her thinking . She thought the story sufficiently important to retell , in a pamphlet called “ Antigone , ” 92 for the sake of her factory co-workers and manual laborers in 1936 . Weil ’ s idea was that masterpieces of Greek poetry should be available and accessible to the masses who , she thought , would surely be moved by the narrative and characters . In brief , the story revolves around a young woman , Antigone , who stands in opposition to the laws of her own country and the head of its government , Creon , who also happens to be her uncle . Her two brothers , Eteocles and Polyneices , following the death of their father , Oedipus , were rivals for the throne . Eteocles succeeded in becoming king , and held to the throne , causing Polyneices to be exiled . Upon his exile , he joined with foreign armies and invaded the city at stake , Thebes , whereupon the brothers came face to face and killed each other in a fight . Their uncle , Creon , then took over the throne and declared that the traitor , Polyneices , shall be left unburied , his body to be picked over by wild animals and left to rot in the weather , to reflect his dishonorable life . As Weil informs us , “ Here it is important to know that for the Greeks there could never be a greater shame or dishonor than to be treated in this way after death. ” 93 Creon made this decision known to the citizens of Thebes and issued a warning that anyone who would disobey the decree would be put to death . Antigone was left behind in the shadow of her brothers ’ deaths , along with her sister Ismene . Antigone , out of love for Polyneices and unable to endure the thought of her brother ’ s body being treated so disrespectfully , decides she will bury him . Her sister , Ismene , ever the practical and law-abiding sibling , strongly discourages Antigone from her plan—unsuccessfully . Antigone ’ s love for her brothers transcends human and political discriminations and reveals her orientation to something more eternal . When Creon asks her whether she dared to disobey his law and was in fact the one responsible for the illegal burial , she replies with conviction : Yes , it was not Zeus that made the proclamation ; nor did Justice , which lives with those below , enact such laws as that , for mankind . I did not believe your proclamation had such power to enable one who will someday die to override God ’ s ordinances , unwritten and secure . They are not of today and yesterday ; they live forever ; none knows when first they were . These are the laws whose penalties I would not incur from the gods , through fear of any man ’ s temper.94 Subsequently , a dialogue with Creon ensues , but as Weil points out , “ he judges everything from the point of view of the State , ” while Antigone “ holds to another view which seems to her superior. ” 95 Ismene eventually comes to her side and wants to share in her sister ’ s tragic fate , and Creon leads them both away . Eventually , and despite attempts by her fiancé Haemon ( who is also Creon ’ s son ) to reason with his father on behalf of Antigone and the city of Thebes , she is dragged off by the king to be sealed alive in a cave , her tomb , where she will linger , agonizingly , on the threshold between life and death . She breaks down , weeping , but receives no consolation from her fellow citizens . But the story does not end there . As Weil summarizes , A priest who can tell the future predicts the most terrible disasters for [ Creon ] if he does not deliver Antigone . After a long and violent discussion the king gives in . The cave is opened and there Antigone is found already dead , having succeeded in strangling herself . There also her fiancé is found , convulsively kissing her corpse . The young man has chosen to be entombed with her . As soon as he sees his father he gets up and in an excess of frustrated fury , kills himself before his father ’ s eyes . The queen , as she learns of her son ’ s suicide , kills herself also . When news of her death is announced to the king , this man who knew so well how to speak as a master breaks down , mastered by sorrow.96 Although one message is clear—hubris brings about devastation and destroys human lives—there is no resurrection in the end , or satisfying resolution in this story . Yet the protagonist , Antigone , captured Weil for many of the same reasons that Christ did . Here was a loner , absurd in her context and radical in her orientation , whose indiscriminate love leads to her exile , affliction , and eventual ( unjust ) demise ; “ it was the same love , ” Weil writes , “ extreme and absurd , which led Christ to the Cross. ” 97 Antigone ’ s virtue is precisely her immoderation , her madness . But it is a surfeit of love with an orientation to the supernatural . The tragic art of Antigone—both the character and the play itself—is the representation of the trespassing of fabricated human boundaries . Antigone embodies this border-crossing , par excellence , as William Robert eloquently describes : Tragedy crosses the line . It is excessive ; it goes too far ; that is what makes it tragic . Tragedy is not tragic simply because someone or something dies but because someone or something steps across a border and , in doing so , breaches a boundary believed to be unbreachable . Someone or something exceeds an established limit . Therein lies the tragedy.98 If tragedy represents border-crossing and “ puts on trial limits and limitations , ” 99 we might wonder what ( if anything ) distinguishes it from Weil ’ s notion of evil , understood as the imaginary extension of self over and through the ( real ) limits of others . But the tragic question is , as Robert goes on to ask , borrowing from Jacques Derrida , “ What is it , then , to cross this ultimate border ? ” 100—that is , the border demarcating life from death , between the natural and the supernatural , between human and divine law ? The tragic test does not lie in , for instance , extending our own power by negating the limits of other lives , for this breach would occur on the same ( horizontal , natural ) plane and would not introduce any new paradigm . This was Creon ’ s mistake . However , if we forego human comforts and even our life itself on the basis of a principle , which promises nothing in return , not even a consoling thought or word , then we have breached a limit—we have changed planes . Antigone , again , represents this genuine breach ; as her practical sister Ismene tells her , she is “ in love with the impossible. ” 101 As Robert describes her , “ Antigone is a foreigner , even at home . She is from the start . . . ‘ the system ’ s vomit , ’ finding no place in nature or culture. ” Moreover , her homelessness means that “ she is an aporia , a ‘ non-way. ’ ” 102 She can not be figured into a standard category or be reasoned with . Her committed orientation to the supernatural and eternal decrees , in the face of her uncle Creon , who represents human authority and brute force , is her excess and is what renders her abject . But here again , like the non-lover of Phaedrus , prudence and self-regulation for the sake of temporal concerns would be the refusal of the divine . Her own displacement , including her live burial , suffices to decenter us , the readers , in the same way that Weil thinks the Incarnation of Christ should . Her character , like Christ ’ s , is a direct challenge to our complacent obedience to worldly powers and constructed boundaries . Antigone mocks our terror before that ultimate border , which we revere in our prioritizing of biological human life before all else . ( In this sense , is not self-preservation the ultimate idol ? How many sacrifices do we lay before this golden calf ? ) Were she pragmatic , “ level-headed , ” and sensible , Antigone would not be immortal . What we learn from Antigone is that there is an aesthetic-religious basis to her actions . She is , as she admits , in her commitment to bury her brother Polyneices against the king ’ s orders , “ a criminal—but a religious one. ” 103 The orientation toward the eternal , by definition inspired , manifests as a challenge to natural and human authority and to our ordinary , manufactured ways of seeing the world . While tragedy points to the irreducibility of affliction and in so doing , reorients our attention to the placeless and abject , it is also true that the beautiful can serve to place the excluded in a way that is subversive to mainstream collectivities ; hence Weil sought to introduce Antigone to as many of the lower-class workers and societal outcasts as possible . In the end , the art of Antigone is a form of pure beauty by virtue of its tragic breach ; for this reason , it is experientially indigestible—we can only look , and be transformed . “ Purity , ” as Weil writes , in one of her many paradoxes , “ is the power to contemplate defilement , ” for when we are contemplating human wretchedness , we are thereby also necessarily contemplating the ( absent ) supernatural , which is wholly other than us.104 And this is precisely how “ extreme purity ” is defined by Weil : the capability to “ contemplate both the pure and the impure , ” for “ impurity can do neither : the pure frightens it , the impure absorbs it. ” 105 Extreme purity in an individual , who is necessarily decreated and has experienced exile , must be characterized by this internal tension of holding contraries before the mind , resisting the tendency toward simplicity and ideology . She writes , for example that “ beauty is the harmony of chance and the good. ” 106 Beauty is , then , the conjunction of the vulnerable , fragile , earthly , accidental , and mortal thing with an infinite love that nevertheless does not disguise the finitude of that thing . This paradox also constitutes justice . As we have seen , the beautiful and the just can be contemplated , but not easily consumed or fetishized . In this way , beauty and justice are conducive to further creations and political actions demanding that degree of attention.107 The beautiful work of art provides no self-confirmation but is instead a paradoxical attraction that defers the immediacy of our egoistic projections . Likewise , the just polis , inspired by beauty , is never self-satisfied or complacent in the manner of Creon but is dialogical and would seem to resist the static identity and tyranny that makes for an exclusive and parochial collective . Perversions—Fabrications of order Despite the elements of tragedy and impersonality in the beautiful , Weil recognizes that beauty always functions first as a carnal attraction ; as Plato recognized , there is an erotic pull toward physical beauty that , under the right conditions and with the proper orientation , can lead us to love of the divine . But there is always the chance that in the carnal attraction , we become fixated on the particular and foreclose any possibility of aesthetic , moral , or religious ascension . The character of Antigone , for example , is attractive to us on a certain , natural level : she is courageous and audacious . We love a good scandal and may even exhibit a morbid fascination with her punishment and death . If we take the tragedy in this dissected and distracted way , it may only reinforce our basest tendencies . For this reason , the line between the consumptive attitude and the attentive attitude may appear quite thin . Weil wonders , “ If the beautiful is the real presence of God in matter , and if contact with the beautiful is a sacrament in the full sense of the word , how is it that there are so many perverted aesthetes ? Nero. ” 108 She theorizes that what Nero ( and other “ perverted aesthetes ” ) love can not properly be called “ beauty ” but is a bad substitution that is more like a “ demoniacal ” art.109 We suspect that tragedy and impersonality in art can not really prevent its appropriation by a would-be tyrant ; the pure can be defiled , the tragic can be sanitized , and the impersonal can be personified , for the imagination is sufficiently powerful to distort even “ transcendent beauty ” into a self-affirming image . A-voidance via the eating and desecration of beauty is certainly possible . While some types of art lend themselves more to consumption and perversion than others , beauty , per se , can not promise deliverance if consent to look is refused ; hence , there remains a real moral risk in the aesthetic object . In one who consents to the tension of savoring , the beautiful begins to develop the faculty of attention ; but for one who seeks immediate appeasement of this feeling of hunger , ways of establishing order among humans and things are oftentimes sought that dissipate any aporia.110 This establishing of arbitrary order is the attempt to fabricate beauty , to construct it by dint of the will . As we know , however , beauty does not issue directly from humans any more than goodness does , according to Weil , so the assertion of creative authorship can only result in ugliness and injustice . As she rightly notes , “ This desire for order is the result of a sense of beauty , ” and unfortunately , there is often a connection “ between tyranny and the love of beauty ” even though the latter becomes perverse.111 She continues : “ Apart from war , the instrument for increasing his power , Louis XIV was only interested in festivals and architecture . Moreover war itself . . . stirs man ’ s sense of beauty in a way that is vital and poignant. ” 112 For instance , journalist Chris Hedges describes in his book War is a Force that Gives Us Meaning the almost incredible disillusionment that faces victims of war in times of peace , when the ordered and meaningful world that characterized their comradeship in struggle disappears due to irrelevance . In his introduction , he gives an account of an encounter he had with a woman and her friends in Bosnia , in the fall of 1995 , a few weeks after the war had ended : . . . All she and her friends did that afternoon was lament the days when they lived in fear and hunger , emaciated , targeted by Serbian gunners on the heights above . They did not wish back the suffering , and yet , they admitted , those days may have been the fullest of their lives . . . . [ What they expressed was ] the disillusionment with a sterile , futile , empty present . Peace had again exposed the void that the rush of war , of battle , had filled . Once again they were , as perhaps we all are , alone , no longer bound by that common sense of struggle , no longer given the opportunity to be noble , heroic , no longer sure what life was about or what it meant.113 In a similar vein , Weil writes , “ Revolutionaries . . . if they didn ’ t lie to themselves , would know that the achievement of the revolution would make them unhappy , because they would lose their reason for living . And it is the same with all desires. ” 114 As another recent example , one may recall Radovan Karadzic , the former leader of the Bosnian Serbs who was indicted for war crimes in 1995 and is “ held responsible for the three-year siege of Sarajevo , leading to the deaths of as many as 10,000 civilians. ” Karadzic has famously been interested in poetry , even attempting to become a renowned poet himself . But unsurprisingly , “ A critic in the mid-1980s gently noted that Karadzic was ‘ not very successful ’ with his poetry , because of his tendency to engage in ‘ verbal narcissism. ’ Karadzic himself regarded his poetry as brilliant , however , and told the chief psychiatrist at the mental health clinic where he worked that he was destined to become ‘ one of the three most important poets writing in the Serbian language. ’ ” 115 If the attraction to beauty is so closely tied to the desire for order and therefore sometimes , perversely , tyranny and a lust for war , what can be looked upon as a safeguard to prevent the dangerous distortion ? Sadly , there is nothing that can keep one from attempting to fabricate or consume the beautiful . But it is imperative to understand that the attempt to impose self-generated order , especially when manifested as war , exclusion of human beings from a city , abuse of a family , marginalization of a minority , et cetera , results in [ the severing of ] every bond of poetry and love between human beings and the universe . It is to plunge them forcibly into the horror of ugliness . There can scarcely be a greater crime . We all have a share by our complicity in an almost innumerable quantity of such crimes . If only we could understand , it should wring tears of blood from us.116 That is , there is a contagion to ugliness , as there is to beauty . This understanding depends greatly upon our cultivation of this aesthetic-ethical-religious posture of attention we have been describing . Our complicity in subjecting others to ugliness and despair is precisely our inattention that reinforces and enlarges our own appetite for power and our corresponding hatred of others ’ limits , as well as our attempts to create beauty by “ seeing ” connections that do not exist , or by projecting ourselves into the poem , play , or painting , or by forging meaning based on egoistic illusion . “ Bad artists , ” as Iris Murdoch argues , “ are useful to tyrants , whose policies they can simplify and romanticize , as in Stalinist-style art. ” 117 We might add that bad artists are themselves tyrants , in the sense that their creations have a disfiguring effect on the psyches of their fellows , by adding to the pull of gravity in the world . Nevertheless , even the most beautiful and accurate representations of tragedy can not inspire justice if we refuse to look . But when we do look , and as the training of attention begins through our contemplation of divine paradox , we become capable of not only encountering beauty on deeper levels but also of being a vehicle for it , too , through maintaining contact with what is impossibly real . Such inspiration , Weil concludes , “ if we know how to receive it , tends—as Plato said—to make us grow wings to overcome gravity. ” 118 6Possibility and impossibility Should we continue in sin in order that grace may abound ? By no means ! How can we who died to sin go on living in it ? Do you not know that all of us who have been baptized into Christ Jesus were baptized into his death ? Therefore we have been buried with him by baptism into death , so that , just as Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father , so we too might walk in newness of life . ROMANS 6:1–4 They tell you we are dreamers . The true dreamers are those who think things can go on indefinitely the way they are . SLAVOJ ŽIŽEK , speaking at Occupy Wall Street protests , Zuccotti Park , October 10 , 2011 Violent interruption What counts as interruption in a cacophonous and amplified milieu ? What arrests the gaze in a landscape of billboards and brightly flashing advertisements ? What , moreover , can still our self-defensive imaginations , depose our stubborn senses of false sovereignty , and resist our greedy assimilations of phenomena into a self-preserving symbolic order and nexus of meanings ? Is there anything that refuses being flattened onto the screen of competitive commensurability—becoming another commodity—where value is ascribed on the basis of popular consensus or else the power of capital ? What can awaken us from our anesthetizing political dreams ? These questions , admittedly , arise from a suspicion that , after all , the paradoxical ideals described in the previous chapters are simply not possible in our complex and disoriented world , even if they are desirable . Simon Critchley characterizes modern post-Kantian philosophy as beginning , “ not in an experience of wonder at what is , but from an experience of failure and lack. ” 1 Philosophy , that is , begins in disappointment with the world , as we sense that things are not simply wonder-full . This experience is not reducible to an awareness of the multitude of crises plaguing the world—wars , violent suppressions , environmental catastrophes , and so on—but is also constituted by the sense that the solutions being proposed are disguised derivatives of the problems themselves . Our paradigms are not subjected to rigorous critique , but are often only reaffirmed : in response to problems created by various technologies , we offer technological fixes ; threats of nuclear armament from countries whose interests do not align with ours reveal our own blood-thirst and eagerness for war ; in response to our distracted students we serve up “ innovative educational models ” and “ multimodal tools ” claiming that many learn best by video gaming , texting , and Facebook postings.2 For Simone Weil , these predictable responses to perpetual problems are only the signs of the force of gravity ; it is , in fact , impossible for us to emerge from these destructive cycles—except through grace . However , Weil ’ s idea of grace is not a simple one ; like the other significant aspects of experience already discussed in previous chapters , grace is paradoxically encountered . More than representing a mere promise of deliverance from the laws of moral gravity and necessity that permeate the natural world , grace also is the violent and unexpected rupture that opens the space for what , in worldly terms , is “ impossible. ” Weil writes of two movements of grace— “ the ascending movement ” and “ the descending movement of the second degree of grace. ” 3 This chapter will offer an elaborated phenomenological description of these two movements of grace and , in so doing , will reveal significant ethical characteristics of the subject created by grace . We will describe the two movements of grace as two stages that , taken together , comprise a paradox : ( 1 ) Death , or the decreative event , followed by , ( 2 ) Recreation , or subjectivating inspiration.4 After detailing grace as a process of decreation-recreation , we will propose three descriptions of the subject formed by the workings of grace . First , the decreative event of grace serves as a challenge to current structures of identity , meaning , and law , and to any objectification of the experience that would provide any claims to knowledge . The subject of grace is therefore de-posed from secure and privileged identity and scenes of power . Second , this rupture of grace ensures that certain options or “ possibilities ” are no longer counted as such . Instead , the subject is left with a radical choice between incommensurate orientations , and this choice constitutes the subject ’ s only freedom . Finally , the recreating aspect of grace inspires in the subject an orientation toward the impossible , that which is inconceivable within current paradigms and systems , and this new subject becomes the vehicle for genuine creativity . The subject who has been de-posed by grace and subsequently flooded by new illumination does not therefore settle for what is conveniently pragmatic , nor does she fall to the temptations of fatalism or nihilism . Only grace can generate works that reveal and present the formerly invisible , give voice to the previously inaudible , and offer beautiful and truthful answers to the once-insoluble . The first movement of grace—Death , or the decreative event It is curious that even though Weil writes of two distinct movements of grace , one “ ascending ” and the other “ descending , ” she offers the general declaration that “ grace is the law of the descending movement. ” 5 It is , in other words , a sort of energy that , like gravity , comes down , but , unlike gravity , can have this effect without natural force or weight . In what sense , then , can the first ascending movement be consistent with a general law of descent ? The ascension Weil refers to is in the context of an allegorical description of creation . That is , the first ( ascending ) movement of grace points to God ’ s withdrawal or renunciation from being all so that something else ( creation ) might exist . The supernatural , as we have seen , is a transcendent reality paradoxically constituted by self-limitation for the sake of the existence and freedom of others . Being left to ourselves in the absence of the supernatural , we humans can perform a similar self-renunciation and forgoing of power to bring about greater alignment with this reality , but we can not do this with our own finite efforts . “ Not to exercise all the power at one ’ s disposal is to endure the void . This is contrary to all the laws of nature . Grace alone can do it. ” 6 In more general terms , ascension here implies the vacuum or void left because of the withdrawal of pure goodness from creation for the sake of our existence and freedom ; our human experience is that of an elemental absence , sometimes acutely perceived in a particular event or situation that destabilizes our constructed securities and habituated mental defenses . Otherwise , we forget our finitude and limitations , and in this way , we deny the independent reality of everything else . The first movement of grace is only that which reminds us of our created status . A common interpretation of Weilienne grace , however , is that it is the other “ side ” of waiting for and desiring pure goodness , or the reward of humbled patience . She has contended , for instance , that if we “ leave a vacuum . . . a supernatural reward results. ” 7 Does this not mean that if we , too , renounce ourselves , our prejudicial desires , our sense of unlimited power , and our projects , we can rightfully expect to be satisfied by grace ? The supernatural reward seemingly refers to the second movement of grace that descends to fill the void and will be further addressed in the next section . But here it is important to recognize that for Weil , grace first stimulates the original void , and in this sense , the first movement of grace is experientially distinct from the second . She writes , “ Grace fills empty spaces , but it can only enter where there is a void to receive it , and it is grace itself which makes this void. ” 8 She goes on to describe , “ First there must be a tearing out , something desperate has to take place , the void must be created. ” And then , referencing St. John of the Cross , she hints : “ Void : the dark night. ” 9 But a qualification is needed here , for we have previously said that void is inherent in and constitutive of our very being . What then , would it mean to say that the first movement of grace creates the void ? One must understand that Weil recognizes the ease and frequency with which the void is forgotten and filled by humans bent on manufacturing illusions of self-sufficiency and even royalty for themselves . Thus , whenever she speaks of a void being “ created ” or “ made , ” she is referring to an event that shatters our illusions and complacencies and has the potential to call us to a universal but unspeakable truth about our situation . To borrow from Alain Badiou , we might understand the event as a supplemental happening that we , with our usual ways of understanding the world , can not account for . The event is unpredictable and uncontrollable , and it “ compels us to decide a new way of being. ” 10 The event is a singular encounter , and it exceeds the margins with which we have circumscribed politics , sex , culture , religion , and even our understanding of ourselves . The event itself is sensed as something precarious and tenuous because it can not be subjected to our previous frameworks of knowledge ; in fact , it is what makes a hole in our knowledge . That is , it resists objectification , and because we can not assimilate and compartmentalize it into our assumed nexus of meanings , our sense of psychical , emotional , and social stability and certainty is shaken . We experience a death to self . In short , a void is ( re ) created—or , more properly , the void is stimulated so that we become aware of it . This awareness of the void is the initiation of our decreation by the event , the first movement of grace . We must remember that Weil ’ s depiction of decreation entails a willing renunciation on the part of the person ; it is not simply destruction suffered passively . While it is true that grace initiates the recalling and thus opening of the void , it is possible to have built up such a system of deflections and rationalizations , or to have embraced such a deterministic theology , that no matter what interruptions of grace arrive on the scene , every rupture initiated will be so quickly filled by the workings of the imagination that “ events ” are scarcely noticed and the narcissistic ego remains intact . Miklos Vetö characterizes the self-protective ego in the following way : The whole sphere of the self is maintained by a centripetal force greedily sucking in reality , and the more one nears the center , the more powerful is the force . . . . The self is a violent contraction paralyzing and crushing the beings and things it encounters . Such an attitude serves the purpose of destroying the world , leaving there a trace of the self ; it never helps us to understand the world.11 This destructive attitude is only aided by the faculty of imagination . Weil writes that “ the imagination is continually at work filling up all the fissures through which grace might pass. ” 12 As we have seen , this imagination is the producer of fictions , generally by flattening and simplifying phenomena , that is , depriving them of their reality . This procedure always has the effect of ( falsely ) confirming our own sense of centrality and our own blind desires . However , genuine decreation is “ imitation of God ’ s renunciation in creation , ” a willingness to strip ourselves of our “ imaginary divinity. ” 13 In such cases , we really suffer the loss of the false sense we carried around that we were the center of the universe ; we feel the loss of control , we see the idiocy and narrowness of our desires , we perceive our mediocrity , and we feel our own finitude and mortality . The event humbles us in an unexpected and excruciating way , and we feel as if we were dying . Those who are visited by events and who are open to suffer the grace of decreation are often falsely charged with being masochistic . The label is reflective of our contemporary tendency to medicalize and psychologize every aspect of humanity , but it also serves as a convenient buffer to and defense of an imperative to be attentive to the world . But such an imperative should not be confused with an active “ seeking out ” of pain and suffering , as we have seen . It is ultimately only through decreation that one can make contact with pure good , and “ the cross ” certainly seems to fall under the category of decreation . But what does Weil mean when she says that we “ should not be able to choose to imitate [ Christ ] ” ? 14 Here , despite all appearances , she is not denying our ability and responsibility of orienting ourselves such that we are open to whatever befalls us , but the authenticity and mystery of the Crucifixion ( and of a decreative event in general ) is located , for Weil , in its pure bitterness , absent of any notions of romantic martyrdom . The event is never self-imposed but always arrives in spite of ourselves , and we are undone by it . The second movement of grace—Recreation , or subjectivating inspiration We are decreated by the first movement of grace , but we are also recreated by a second movement of grace that visits an attentive orientation . The evental interruption is only the beginning of the story , for something—consent to the void and to being a vehicle for the good—is required of us . As Badiou tells us and Weil would no doubt agree , “ There is no instantaneous salvation . . . The subject has to be given in his labor , and not only in his sudden emergence . ‘ Love ’ is the name of that labor. ” 15 Weil frames this imperative to love in the work of arresting the imagination that was described in Chapter 4 as training : “ We must continually suspend the work of the imagination filling the void within ourselves . If we accept no matter what void , what stroke of fate can prevent us from loving the universe ? ” 16 Insofar as we are faithful to and persevere in the space created by the rupture , rejecting easy consolations and clearing away void-fillers , we become increasingly able to respond to the genuine needs of the world—response-able , or a responsible subject who no longer engages in fabricating her own self-affirming reality , but instead lovingly attends to the impersonal Real . Earlier , we alluded to the notion that the second ( descending ) movement of grace might indicate a supernatural reward that comes down to one who has suffered the initial rupture of grace . But the descent here actually refers to the consented and committed attention and its necessary effects that feel like the impossible , impractical , excessive , or absurd answers to our most pressing crises . Badiou ’ s words in describing what he calls “ the ethic of a truth ” may be helpful in understanding Weil ’ s second movement of grace . He writes , “ Do all that you can to persevere in that which exceeds your perseverance . Persevere in the interruption . Seize in your being that which has seized and broken you. ” 17 The requirement here is to “ not give up ” by deflecting the unfamiliar and unassimilable revelations and returning to the ordinary ways of approaching the world . But for Weil , this perseverance in the void that goes by the name attention is unnatural for us and , again , is experienced as impossible , for we want very much to grasp onto something tangible , known , or stabilizing when we have been riven by an event . It is for this reason that she writes , “ Any attempt to gain this deliverance by means of my own energy would be like the efforts of a cow which pulls at its hobble and so falls onto its knees. ” 18 Nevertheless , we are responsible for annihilating that sense of need for homeostasis , including the times that we feel we are owed something when we have been harmed or else when we have done good for others . There is good reason , therefore , to question whether this “ supernatural reward ” should be regarded as any kind of guarantee of relief and whether it could , properly , be expected . As Weil herself writes , “ Every kind of reward constitutes a degradation of energy , ” 19 and in saying this , she is giving voice to the fact that an anticipated return on a good deed deprives that deed or that patience of its energy of grace . Badiou articulates a similar point when he writes that grace “ is what comes without being due. ” 20 Unlike Weil ’ s idea of gravity , which pulls us quite naturally toward a filling of the void or establishing of equivalence , the second movement of grace requires an unnatural ( or “ supernatural ” ) desire , and it is a desire liberated from objects ( including objects of knowledge ) , such that “ there is an unspeakable wrench in the soul at the separation of a desire from its object. ” 21 This excruciating desire-without-an-object is synonymous with consent to the void , consent to the loss of experienced equilibrium , the forgoing and forgetting of reward or desert . Grace is present and enables further attentiveness where one has left that vacuum and where “ other wages ” have been refused . As we will later describe in detail , it is only through such active renunciation and attentiveness that we become certain kinds of responsible subjects ; the mode of self-preservation , however , is antithetical to our ethical subjectivation . Our inclinations to self-preservation and self-enhancement signify our relapse to the un-event-full world , the mode of being prior to subjectivation . Badiou describes this irony well : The ordinary behavior of the human animal is a matter of what Spinoza calls “ perseverance in being , ” which is nothing other than the pursuit of interest , or the conservation of self . . . To belong to the situation is everyone ’ s natural destiny , but to belong to the composition of a subject of truth concerns a particular route , a sustained break , and it is very difficult to know how this composition is to be superimposed upon or combined with the simple perseverance-of-self.22 The route of the “ sustained break ” is simultaneously what grace permits and requires for its constitution of the attending subject . But when we become impatient for a return on our investment ( when we begin , even , to think in those terms ! ) , and when we turn in desperation to earthly energies and void-fillers in general , Weil tells us that we become “ incapable of thinking and doing anything but evil. ” 23 Counterweights , such as self-congratulation , revenge , rationalization , and self-pity , must all be cast aside . The importance of the receptivity and continued consent to grace alone can not be overstated . We should note here that there is a danger that lurks in involving grace in a formulaic ethical prescription , however . Precisely because grace exceeds our power , control , and effort , we should refrain from thinking that we can order or dictate its arrival in any way . Weil explains the proper orientation : “ We must give up everything which is not grace and not even desire grace. ” 24 In desiring grace as an end , there is a strong temptation to objectify it , to have some-thing in mind , and to carry the conceit of being able to control its presence . In such cases , we foreclose the possibility of real openness and vulnerability to the advent of events . We think of our own spiritual station , instead of doing the work of love , which necessitates an orientation toward what is exterior to us . Paradoxically , receptivity to grace will entail detachment from the idea of grace . This is perhaps one of Weil ’ s most profound spiritual insights , as when she warns : “ The presence of God in us has as its condition a secret so deep that it is even a secret from us . There are times when thinking of God separates us from him . Modesty is the condition of nuptial union. ” 25 The question now becomes : What is it to think and act in accordance with the event of grace , if we are not to think about grace , or even desire it ? What is it to seize the seizure ? In our perseverance and endurance of the void created by the event , a resurrection of sorts takes place ; a new order is established that breaks radically with old ways of behaving , speaking , seeing , thinking , and believing . A process of subjectivation is initiated insofar as we are faithful to the rupture of the event . What is this new being ? What constitutes the new world order ? The deposed In Weil ’ s writings , as we have noted , grace can appear as a sort of nourishment or “ supernatural bread ” that enables loving attentiveness . What is remarkable about this conception is that this energy must paradoxically function as an anti-food , or an emptiness , that maintains the void . Weil states , for instance , that “ we should not ask for earthly bread , ” where earthly bread represents all manner of void-fillers , alternative sources of energy and incentives for action , such as “ money , ambition , consideration , decorations , celebrity , power , [ and even ] our loved ones. ” 26 In addition , we may consider dogmas , fixed identities , religious communities , trite art , and ideologies as examples of earthly “ fillers , ” whose function is to generate complacent self-satisfaction . One reason these sources of energy , or “ other wages , ” should be regarded with caution is that we ourselves are able to find and often secure them , and this gives us the illusion that our being “ carries the principle of its preservation within itself. ” 27 Weil describes the danger inherent in filling the void : The soul knows for certain only that it is hungry . The important thing is that it announces its hunger by crying . A child does not stop crying if we suggest to it that perhaps there is no bread . It goes on crying just the same . The danger is not lest the soul should doubt whether there is any bread , but lest , by a lie , it should persuade itself that it is not hungry . It can only persuade itself of this by lying , for the reality of its hunger is not a belief , it is a certainty.28 Thus the crying , which is to say the supplication , is morally important , for it represents an attitude that recognizes the reality of our finitude and our inability to be self-sufficient ; it counteracts every tendency toward egoism . That “ lie ” that says we are not “ hungry ” is for Weil the beginning of selfishness and evil . Similarly , Weil observes that , in a general sense , she is devoid of “ the principle of rising ” within herself.29 That is , she says that only by directing her attention toward something real and something better than herself can she be “ really raised up. ” 30 She writes , “ No imaginary perfection can draw me upward even by the fraction of an inch. ” 31 She makes clear that this attention or “ thought direction ” is not to be confused with the “ suggestions ” that are only imaginative projections : If I say to myself every morning , “ I am courageous , I am not afraid , ” I may become courageous , but with a courage which conforms to what , in my present imperfection , I imagine under that name , and accordingly my courage will not go beyond this imperfection . It can only be a modification on the same plane , not a change of plane.32 The change of plane—epitomized , as we have just seen , by Antigone ’ s “ breach ” —arrives only through the advent of grace , or “ the supernatural , ” for by definition , grace exceeds the limits of our conceptions . Additionally , grace illuminates what , on a natural level , is considered impossible and extreme . In fact , for Weil , contradiction is the criterion of the real in the context of this higher plane , for . . . we can not by suggestion obtain things which are incompatible . Only grace can do that . A sensitive person who by suggestion becomes courageous hardens himself ; often he may even , by a sort of savage pleasure , amputate his own sensitivity . Grace alone can give courage while leaving the sensitivity intact , or sensitivity while leaving the courage intact.33 The method of “ suggestion ” alluded to here is tantamount to an effort of the will , for Weil . It is ineffective when it comes to the acquisition of virtues , which would appear to cancel one another out , for we do not know how to strike the balance , except by compromising to some extent one or the other . This is why Weil says that saintliness is characterized by the “ simultaneous existence of incompatible things in the soul ’ s bearing , ” or a “ balance which leans both ways at once. ” 34 For this to be possible , the person has to have been “ wrenched apart , ” 35 or deposed by grace . While for Weil , “ we can only advance horizontally ” 36 when we set out with our own intentions , we must also realize that forgoing active attempts at melioration does not mean that we are purely passive in the face of injustices—a common misunderstanding , to be sure . The obvious question , then , is : Following our deposition , what is our proper disposition if we are not to make an active search and not to orient ourselves in a particular direction ? Her response to her own question affirms the importance of the emptiness of attention , even to the point of agnosticism . Weil utilizes another analogy of a child to explain our proper posture , though here , the natural tendencies of the child may prove a handicap . She says that a child , who has lost his mother in the street , will run about in all directions , crying , and looking for her , but this is the wrong approach . If he had the sense and courage to stand still , wait on her , and call out for her , she would find him sooner , Weil tells us . But the analogy is not quite sufficient , for Weil says that in our case , we must “ not [ even ] call upon someone , ” for “ we still do not know if there is anyone ; but cry out that we are hungry and want bread. ” 37 Again , what is essential for us to know is only that we are hungry ; it is not necessary or useful to believe that there is a Provider , or even that there is bread . It is the hunger that we can be certain is real , that characterizes our deposed disposition and that opens the door to grace that makes our attention creative and responsible . But Weil writes , “ All those who believe that food exists , or will one day be produced , in this world , are lying. ” 38 Being attentive , then , precludes thinking in terms of a particular object and certainly forecloses any thoughts or bets on salvation . As we saw in Chapter 1 , if we take on a search for God , and it appears our search has succeeded , the result , Weil writes , can only be illusory , and what we have found will be a false God . The proper comportment for attention transcends the horizontal effort and the intentional framework . Such consent to the void does involve an ethos of quietude and stillness that goes against our nature , but this religious orientation is not one of quietism , inaction , and complete passivity , for consent simultaneously necessitates active engagement , or what Weil called action non agissante . One comparison she uses is of solar energy ( representing grace ) , which works against physical gravity , permitting animals and vegetation to grow and rise vertically . It is the only power that can overcome gravity . Even other sources of mechanical energy , like coal and petroleum , ultimately derive from this primary resource . A good farmer will arrange everything “ in such a way that the plants capable of using [ solar energy ] and transmitting it to us will receive it in the best possible conditions. ” 39 In like manner , our active efforts should only be geared toward clearing away the pervasive void-filling distractions , in order that we might receive the original source of energy that may one day yield fruit . In other words , we are “ to dispose our soul so that it can receive grace , ” but even this effort is made possible by the initial movement of grace.40 Attention , therefore , is the opening to vertical—that is to say , genuine—progress . What is produced by way of this progress is without precedent and beyond prediction . Attention consists , as we know , in a looking , without discrimination and without perspective , at everything , pleasant or unpleasant , and a noting of the connections and relationships between disparate phenomena . To do this , however , is very difficult , because our perceptual faculties tend toward resolving ambiguities , imposing discrete distinctions , establishing hierarchies , and emphasizing those phenomena that reinforce what the ego has already assumed about itself and the external world . Because the “ I ” does not want to suffer or be compromised in its projects , it rebels against this perceptual generosity , and this rebellion consists in evasion and the strengthening of the imagination that aids it . This is where , again , the muscular , active effort called “ training ” actually has a role . Like the good farmer who consistently pulls up the weeds that block solar energy , [ t ] he only effective and legitimate use of our muscular efforts is to keep at bay and suppress whatever may prevent us from looking up ; they are negatively useful . The part of the soul which is capable of looking at God is surrounded by barking , biting , destructive dogs . They must be controlled by the whip.41 Weil goes on to say that this training is a condition for spiritual ascension , but of itself , it does not enable one to rise . Again , it is only grace that is the elevating power , and “ God comes when we look towards him , ” and “ to look towards him , ” she explains , “ means to love him. ” 42 As we have seen , to love God also means to endure the void and to appreciate the distance between ourselves and the Good : to consent to a deposition of self . This , then , is what it really means to keep one ’ s eyes turned toward God . While there is a proper employment of the subject ’ s agency in clearing distractions away , we can not forget that Weil thinks that by “ remain [ ing ] quite still ” we actually unite ourselves with that which we desire.43 It is this way with grace , for instance : we do not dare make the approach , but a patient and unobstructed hunger for the impossible is the only avenue for realizing the Good . Recall Weil ’ s simile : God and humanity are like two lovers who have missed their rendezvous . Each is there before the time , but each at a different place , and they wait and wait and wait . He stands motionless , nailed to the spot for the whole of time . She is distraught and impatient . But alas for her if she gets tired and goes away . For the two places where they are waiting are at the same point in the fourth dimension . . .44 What this means is that as finite , fallible creatures , our hunger for the Good is of utmost importance , for the creative attention made possible by grace follows desire . This is a desire deprived of a proper object , for objects turn the hunger into a means . When the desire becomes a mere means to an end , the intentional structure dictates base motives and energies , and even the most seemingly charitable gestures become tainted by our greed . For instance , she warns us about self-conscious charity : “ God is not present , even if we invoke him , where the afflicted are merely regarded as an occasion for doing good. ” 45 Weil offers us , therefore , a challenge to “ love on empty , ” writing , A man has all he can do , even if he concentrates all the attention of which he is capable , to look at this small inert thing of flesh , lying stripped of clothing by the roadside . It is not the time to turn his thoughts toward God . Just as there are times when we must think of God and forget all creatures without exception , there are times when , as we look at creatures , we do not have to think explicitly of God . . . . There are times when thinking of God separates us from him.46 Here we are brought back full circle to the importance , in Weil ’ s philosophy , of grasping that grace requires an abstinence from any opiate or energy that can be named or conceived as “ God. ” But we also “ must not seek the void , for it would be tempting God if we counted on supernatural bread to fill it. ” 47 The point is that in our lives , we encounter , on a regular basis , realities that leave us feeling cold , frustrated , and empty . We must not run from the void that we come to recognize ( in these situations ) as constitutive of our individual selves and of human existence in general . When we do cry out for the supernatural bread , or “ grace , ” or “ light , ” we must understand that what we petition for is not a compensation in the usual way . There will be no quick consolation , and no self-affirmation , that anesthetizes us from the trauma . When there has been a compensation provided by the imagination ( like saying to oneself , “ God has a reason for this evil ; it is part of a master plan , ” or “ By my suffering , I advance spiritually , ” ) then grace is refused . Weil explains this character of grace and its prevention by making reference to the Gospel of Matthew : “ That is why we read in the Gospel , ‘ I say to you that these have received their reward. ’ There must be no compensation . It is the void in our sensibility which carries us beyond sensibility. ” 48 What is being requested , then , is the ability to endure the emptiness ; that is , the petition for supernatural bread , or grace , is actually the petition for an increased capacity for attentiveness . This supernatural bread is , then , nothing tangible . In fact , it may very well be silence : “ It is when from the innermost depths of our being we need a sound which does mean something , when we cry out for an answer and it is not given us , it is then that we touch the silence of God. ” 49 Often , however , we attempt to convert this form of the supernatural bread into something tangible , something we can consume ; the temptation to create an idol is nearly irresistible . “ As a rule our imagination puts words into the sounds in the same way we idly play at making out shapes in wreaths of smoke. ” 50 Naturally , we fool ourselves in attempting to make grace something we can consume and attach ourselves to . But in fact , for Weil , we can only desire the impossible . The clear perception of our real situation and the problems that exist therein provides no consolation for us . Instead , by virtue of the view we have accessed , we find ourselves ( de ) positioned at a crossroads : we can resign ourselves to hopelessness with the growing sense of our own impotence , or we can maintain attention to the difficult and perplexing realities , without succumbing to temptingly facile answers . The radical choice “ We see the same colors ; we hear the same sounds , but not in the same way , ” Weil wrote , describing the transformative effects of renouncing our imaginary centeredness in favor of sustained attention.51 By the grace of an event that initially ruptures our imagination , we begin to perceive situations in an altogether new light perceiving , that is , the real problems that face us . In emerging from the world of dreams , the subject is not self-preoccupied but realizes that problems issue from her very self-centeredness and her refusal to accept and respect the being of others and the world around her . According to Weil , this epiphany leaves us with one essential choice , though it may be manifested in an infinite number of ways : “ to desire obedience [ to God ] or not to desire it. ” 52 What does this option mean for us ? As we have noted , grace is what shatters our normal ways of functioning and thinking . These “ normal ” ways , however , are constricted by forces of what Weil calls gravity , the pull toward moral baseness comprised by self-centeredness and the failure to recognize one ’ s own limits , or the overt denial of the reality of others . This gravitational force is so powerful that our ways of being outside of the event ( and hence , outside of grace ) are nevertheless constituted by a kind of obedience—but it is obedience to nature , or “ mechanical necessity. ” Hence , Weil writes , “ If a man does not desire [ obedience to God ] , he obeys nevertheless , perpetually , inasmuch as he is a thing subject to mechanical necessity. ” 53 But the event reveals a “ new necessity . . . constituted by laws belonging to supernatural things , ” and in this new situation , “ certain actions become impossible for [ the subject , while ] others are done by his agency , sometimes almost in spite of himself. ” 54 In other words , the attentiveness made possible by the rupture highlights the distance and incommensurability between former and present ways of being ; they are no longer seen as being constituted by differences of “ degrees ” but are radically opposed . As part of this transformation , many old problems are seen as superfluous and dissolved , while new ( real ) problems are illuminated . In recent years , philosophers such as Simon Critchley , Alain Badiou , and Slavoj Žižek have described the task of philosophy as “ the invention of new problems , ” the deciding , that is , of what the important problems are.55 The “ TV philosopher ” who talks about the problems as they are presented by network news , who engages in the debates in the prescribed terms , has done a great disservice to the task , for , as Badiou writes , “ the sole task of philosophy is to show that we must choose. ” 56 He means that we must choose between two incommensurate types of thought , two terms devoid of any relation , illustrated by Socrates on the one hand and the sophist Callicles on the other , who argues that “ might makes right ” and that the happy man is a tyrant.57 Thus , the problems as presented by Callicles ( or the world ) are not the real problems , and the solutions to these will naturally be beside the point . The real philosopher , then , will always appear as “ a stranger , clothed in his new thoughts , ” and the philosophical commitment will always have a foreignness about it because it is unfamiliar to the banal categories.58 Before we turn our attention back to Weil , a further clarification is warranted about what makes the philosophical commitment a “ strange ” one . Badiou offers a helpful example from the end of Book IX of Plato ’ s Republic . As Badiou describes it : At the end of Book IX , Socrates is discoursing with some youths , as always , and some among them say to him : ‘ This whole story ’ s very nice , but it will never be realized anywhere. ’ The critique of utopia was already in place . So they say to him : ‘ Your Republic will never exist anywhere. ’ And Socrates replies : ‘ In any case , perhaps it will exist somewhere else than in our country. ’ In other words , he says that it will take place abroad , that there will be something foreign and strange about it . . . Genuine philosophical commitment , in situations , creates a foreignness . . . And when it is simply commonplace , when it does not possess this foreignness , when it is not immersed in this paradox , then it is a political commitment , an ideological commitment , the commitment of a citizen , but it is not necessarily a philosophical commitment.59 What Badiou identifies by the exemplar of Socrates is the apparent impossibility of this new vision . The new paradigm does not square with what we already know and experience . Indeed , the philosopher frustrates us by offering paradoxical situations and impossible worlds ; our totalizing knowledge , which is a form of power , is interrupted by something we can not anticipate or lay claim to . For Weil , the “ philosophical commitment ” is , paradoxically , both a precursor ( insofar as it is “ training ” ) and a consequence ( insofar as it is the deciding of the rupture ) of grace . In this new committed way of being , even contemplation of former ways of acting and speaking does not make them inevitable and , in fact , makes them impossible if it is true attention that is given . Conversely , the decreative deposition of the subject that accompanies attention to just actions not only makes such actions possible , but it also makes them necessary ; in other words , the actions that ensue from a void not filled ( made initially possible by grace ) will give themselves as unavoidable and cause us to be “ strange. ” Although attention itself implies a self-renouncing consent , the actions that follow from attentiveness to the Good are not exactly willed on our parts . Weil describes this sort of action : There are cases where a thing is necessary from the mere fact that it is possible . Thus to eat when we are hungry , to give a wounded man , dying of thirst , something to drink when there is water quite near . Neither a ruffian nor a saint would refrain from doing so . By analogy , we have to discern the cases in which , although it does not appear so clearly at first sight , the possibility implies a necessity . . . We should do only those righteous actions which we can not stop ourselves from doing , which we are unable not to do , but , through well-directed attention , we should always keep on increasing the number of those which we are unable not to do.60 So in Weil ’ s paradigm , one ’ s activity is only efficacious and righteous when compelled by what one receives , namely by the inspiration of grace ; for her , it is erroneous to insist that a genuinely good deed originates in the self . There is clearly a paradox in the mandate to do that which we are unable not to do , but the important point is the choice of consent to the attentive/philosophical orientation whereby grace makes real moral progress possible : God has provided that when his grace penetrates to the very center of a man and from there illuminates all his being , he is able to walk on the water without violating any of the laws of nature . When , however , a man turns away from God , he simply gives himself up to the law of gravity . Then he thinks that he can decide and choose , but he is only a thing , a stone that falls.61 The initial choice of orientation determines everything . There is , in Weil ’ s account , freedom to reject grace , but there is no freedom in what follows from that consent to gravity : one ’ s tendencies and base habits only become calcified and a necrotic rigidity takes over . One may argue that the orientation and consent to grace permits no more freedom , since it has been described as a different kind of “ obedience ” ( to God ) . However , because this disposition is characterized by openness and lack of object that fixates it , the scope of what is possible through the attentive being is virtually limitless . She can even , as we detailed in the previous chapter , be counted a genius in her creativity and insight , being a conduit for works that are genuinely beautiful and new , because of her consent to the supernatural orientation . This consent to grace is extraordinarily difficult . Weil compares the process following our consent to the implantation of a seed within us . To nurture the growth of the seedling , “ we can not avoid destroying whatever gets in its way , pulling up the weeds , cutting the good grass , and unfortunately the good grass is part of our very flesh , so that this gardening amounts to a violent operation. ” 62 Our consent to grace , that is , entails that our will and intelligence be employed only for the sake of checking our selves , uprooting the conditions and comforts that aid our forgetfulness and our negligence of the reality the event revealed . The consent itself , whose essence involves the renunciation of all manner of distractions , is experienced as unnatural , since the ego naturally tends to reinstate its mastery and control of situations . Even the most pious and well-intentioned persons are subject to the mechanical laws of gravity and may ironically “ compensate ” themselves for their “ spiritual poverty. ” The essential choice with which we are presented in no matter what situation can be put in the following way : Will we be faithful to the revelation of the phenomenon as it stands with our interests and desires put into abeyance , or will we cloud our own perception and pervert our response by projecting ourselves onto what is revealed ? To achieve the disinterestedness of the former orientation means , again , that we must not will actions in the usual , intentional way , for the sake of a desired end . If grace has had anything to teach us so far , it is that good arrives beyond the scope and power of our selves . In every case of a truly good deed , the origin of the action will be something exterior to us , something that eludes our will , something that seemed impossible . But this fact should not deter us , for “ impossibility is [ only ] the door of the supernatural . We can but knock at it . It is someone else who opens. ” 63 The impossible We have been speaking of the event of grace that convokes us to a decreated orientation characterized by attentiveness or perseverance in the void . It is important to recognize that for Weil , the arrival of grace may become manifest in an unlimited number of ways but always in forms that destabilize our norms , expectations , and even our very agency and will . It is because of this last quality that we can speak of the subject of grace becoming recreated as the vehicle for truly insightful , new , and revelatory works . This is a paradoxical subject , then , whose active intentionality is challenged and replaced by an impersonal anonymity . But until and unless this transformation happens , the individual ’ s actions are subject to the effects of moral and spiritual gravity and will therefore preclude any good , beautiful , or truthful results . As the second movement of grace descends to be revealed to the attentive being who has consented to the first movement , norms and expectations are not reestablished but continue to be exceeded and upset . The fruits of grace , in the process of blossoming from a deposed and attentive subject , are surprising even to that subject : With all things , it is always what comes to us from outside freely and by surprise , as a gift from heaven , without our having sought it , that brings us pure joy . In the same way , real good can only come from outside ourselves , never from our own effort . . . Thus effort truly stretched toward goodness can not reach its goal ; it is after long , fruitless effort which ends in despair , when we no longer expect anything , that , from outside ourselves , the gift comes as a marvelous surprise.64 Paradoxically , this ( passive-active ) receipt of grace simultaneously enables genuine “ creativity ” : grace allows the attentive subject to see the things deserving of the names “ good , ” “ beautiful , ” and “ true , ” and their facilitators are rightly called geniuses by virtue of that attentiveness to the world . Therefore , subjects of grace demand the impossible , for as Weil writes , “ the good is impossible. ” 65 The subject whose formation is initiated by the event of grace will , without the ordinary protective consolations in place , become highly dissatisfied by the forces at work in the social realm , including what is offered by politicians ’ rhetoric , or committees , or news analysts , or popular self-help prescriptions . The slogans and lies fail to ring true anymore , and they fail to amuse . She can no longer humor small talk , whose intention is to keep everyone comfortable . Nor is she content with condescending handouts or even pay raises when they are meant to supplant real justice . She can see behind empty promises made to the afflicted , and see the ways in which they are being used as pawns by the powerful . Yet as stated previously , she is also prevented from desiring or seeking grace itself : “ The object of our search should not be the supernatural , ” Weil writes , “ but the world . The supernatural is light itself : if we make an object of it we lower it. ” 66 Thus , this subject does seek real and meaningful contact with the world , but the problem is that what is discovered as needed when she makes this contact departs so radically from what exists , or from what options are popularly prescribed , that her desires are labeled “ impossible , ” or else , she lacks the language to articulate them . She becomes , she feels , like the idiot vagrant stammering before the magistrate who knows she will never be listened to.67 In any case , idols—ersatz divinities , final solutions , reductive answers , static categories , and self-affirming religions—are laid aside when she is awakened by the event of grace . All such sacred cows and the borders that protect them are troubled by the interruption of the event . The “ Occupy ” protests that began in mid-2011 on Wall Street have been famously characterized by their lack of definite character or reducible creed and by their seemingly absurd demands . This lack of ideology or representative has proved frustrating for politicians and pundits alike who have tried to get a “ handle ” on the movements . But two philosophers in particular , who have supported and spoken at sites of protest , have articulated in different terms what we are calling the rupture of idols and have the potential—despite their own philosophic distance from her—to shed light on Weil ’ s conception of grace as it relates to the hunt for the impossible . Slavoj Žižek , for instance , gave the following illustration : So what are we doing here ? Let me tell you a wonderful , old joke from Communist times . A guy was sent from East Germany to work in Siberia . He knew his mail would be read by censors , so he told his friends : “ Let ’ s establish a code . If a letter you get from me is written in blue ink , it is true what I say . If it is written in red ink , it is false. ” After a month , his friends get the first letter . Everything is in blue . It says , this letter : “ Everything is wonderful here . Stores are full of good food . Movie theatres show good films from the west . Apartments are large and luxurious . The only thing you can not buy is red ink. ” This is how we live . We have all the freedoms we want . But what we are missing is red ink : the language to articulate our non-freedom . The way we are taught to speak about freedom—war on terror and so on—falsifies freedom . And this is what you are doing here . You are giving all of us red ink.68 In other words , we have been living in a dream world . And the words that will capture the truth of the situation will be foreign to the dreamers . Weil puts it : “ It is necessary to touch impossibility in order to come out of the dream world . There is no impossibility in dreams—only impotence. ” 69 And along the same lines , Judith Butler had this to say at the protests : People have asked , so what are the demands ? What are the demands all of these people are making ? Either they say there are no demands and that leaves your critics confused , or they say that the demands for social equality and economic justice are impossible demands . And the impossible demands , they say , are just not practical . If hope is an impossible demand , then we demand the impossible—that the right to shelter , food and employment are impossible demands , then we demand the impossible . If it is impossible to demand that those who profit from the recession redistribute their wealth and cease their greed , then yes , we demand the impossible.70 In Weil ’ s terms , the event of grace falsifies the ordinary language of demands that we are accustomed to speaking and upon which we have depended for a long time . Grace illuminates a situation in such a way that we acutely understand the necessity for the “ red ink , ” new frameworks that gesture to the impossible . Weil writes , In order to provide an armor for the afflicted , one must put into their mouths only those words whose rightful abode is in heaven , beyond heaven , in the other world . There is no fear of its being impossible . Affliction disposes the soul to welcome and avidly drink in everything which comes from there . For these products it is not consumers but producers who are in short supply.71 These other-worldly words welcomed by the afflicted are not necessarily signifiers of the answer that will resolve current crises ; instead , the event of grace may produce a discourse that captures for us in a novel and illuminating way the problem itself , purified of distracting rhetoric and influence . Understanding the problem precisely , even without knowing the answer , will enable us to recognize charlatans , sophists , and partial solutions for what they are . As Weil explains analogically , “ We see that which is opaque through the transparent—the opaque which was hidden when the transparent was not transparent . We see either the dust on the window or the view beyond the window , but never the window itself . . . The reason should be employed only to bring us to the true mysteries , the true undemonstrables , which are reality. ” 72 The reason that casts aside illusory and simplistic identities , definitions , and ideologies is a product of the subjectivation triggered by the event . In this subjectivation , we do not see the event of grace in the sense that we grasp an object ; what can be perceived are real problems that convoke us to response and depend upon our committed attention . Conclusion : Educating paradox You desire truth in the inward being ; therefore teach me wisdom in my secret heart . PSALM 51:6 . . . Consumerist reading isn ’ t the only kind there is . It ’ s also possible to read religiously , as a lover reads , with a tensile attentiveness that wishes to linger , to prolong , to savor , and has no interest at all in the quick orgasm of consumption . PAUL J. GRIFFITHS1 In this book , we have attempted to bring some of Simone Weil ’ s most profound religious insights into the foreground without , thereby , diminishing the fruitful tensions in her thought . There is always a challenge in faithfully presenting the ideas of another , which is nothing more nor less than the challenge of attention itself with its hermeneutic difficulties : How does one facilitate but not get in the way of the object ’ s presentation to others ? In other words , how can we illuminate an idea , a thinker , or a phenomenon without also casting ourselves ( or at least our own symbolic frameworks ) in the spotlight ? We understand the need for creating a real opening to and desire for the reception of new ideas , especially those that rupture preexisting categories . However , as Don Ihde explains the conundrum , The paradox consists in the fact that without some—at least general—idea of what and how one is to look at a thing , how can anything be seen ? Yet , if what is to be seen is to be seen without prejudice or preconception , how can it be circumscribed by definition ? 2 Though Ihde is referring specifically to the “ hermeneutic circle ” that is an ever-present concern in phenomenology , at base , this paradox is a question about education , about how to be the Socratic midwife in the delivery of philosophic wonder . Remembering that for Plato education is a complete reorientation of the soul toward the good , implying a transformation of our desires , Weil underscores the importance of joy in learning as an indispensable precursor to spiritual purity and hunger that “ draws God down. ” 3 The educator , then , seems to be tasked not only with presenting real problems and tensions to her students in such a way that they are stimulated to pursue the love of wisdom themselves , but she must also prevent herself from becoming an obfuscation and distraction for her students , in the process of teaching . Weil expresses this latter concern : May I disappear in order that those things that I see may become perfect in their beauty from the very fact that they are no longer things that I see . I do not in the least wish that this created world should fade from my view , but that it should no longer be to me personally that it shows itself . To me it can not tell its secret which is too high . If I go , then the creator and the creature will exchange their secrets.4 It is , undoubtedly , a strange image of teaching wherein the teacher departs in order that the author/creator and the student may “ exchange their secrets. ” It is also , perhaps , too simple . The educator does have a role to play in being a “ midwife ” or a “ mediator , ” but this role implies its own paradox , as we will see . For Weil , the sole purpose of education is the growth and cultivation of attention that may one day contemplate ( the absent ) God . In light of this , it is worth noting that nearly any subject can be conducive to this development—physics , Latin , philosophy , ballet , et cetera—so long as the student undertakes the challenges presented in a patient and vigilant way . In fact , Weil informs us that subjects for which we lack natural aptitude may be an especial benefit to this cultivation of attention , provided we do not get frustrated and give up . Wrestling with problems or translations , for example , trains the will for its eventual quieting by external inspiration . The student learns not only the particular content—physics equations and applications , for example—but more importantly , she learns humility in the focusing upon present problems : If we concentrate our attention on trying to solve a problem of geometry , and if at the end of an hour we are no nearer to doing so than at the beginning , we have nevertheless been making progress each minute of that hour in another more mysterious dimension . Without our knowing or feeling it , this apparently barren effort has brought more light into the soul.5 However , for this process to take place , the material must be given to the student as a problem , or a paradox . Of itself , this presentation should not involve any fabrication , for Weil contends that “ all truth contains a contradiction. ” 6 In saying this , she does not mean something nonsensical , like truth is illogical , in this narrow philosophic sense . In fact , she tells us , “ It is not the role of philosophy to suppress [ contradictions ] , ” for “ far from being an imperfection of philosophical thought , [ contradiction ] is an essential characteristic without which there is no more than a false appearance of philosophy. ” 7 Instead , contradiction is to be experienced as obstacle to habituated thought and preconception , so that it functions as a “ loosening ” agent with respect to our attachments . Or , to put the experience of paradox in religious terms : “ Contradiction experienced to the very depths of the being tears us heart and soul : it is the cross , ” or the preparation for the death of the “ I , ” which is the heart of philosophy and study in general.8 Just as work capable of cultivating attention requires , according to Weil , an infusion of poetry , and poetry , to be authentic , must reveal contact with fatigue , hunger , and thirst,9 so education must preserve at its center paradox and aporetic tension . We betray our disciplines as disciplines , that is , when we pretend that answers are simple , straightforward , and easy . When we ask rhetorical questions of our students rather than genuine questions—that is , questions that are genuinely questions for us—we mislead them and are misled ourselves . Again , this is not a prescription for the kind of relativism that treats all speculations and interpretations as valid , sound , and relevant . Too often , we make the mistake of thinking that truth that is difficult ( or impossible ) to grasp is the same as the nonexistence of said truth . This mistake is most likely the result of our impatience . Undeniably , Weil thinks that there is truth , and that we must strive toward it : “ When we set out to do a piece of work , it is necessary to wish to do it correctly , ” and when we have failed , we must examine our mistakes squarely and attentively , “ without seeking any excuse or overlooking any mistake or any of our tutor ’ s corrections , trying to get down to the origin of each fault. ” 10 As educators , then , we must be willing to grapple with the real obscurities in a text , with our own intellectual shortcomings ( even in front of a classroom ) , and with the silences following our questions that signal contemplation and growing attention . In short , real teaching , we argue , is not a skill or set of skills , as it is so often characterized in the specialized “ education ” departments and offices of institutions of higher learning today . Rather , to be an educator is to be oriented attentively , in the various contexts this book has explored . The teacher is , then , an exemplar of attention ; in addition to the problematic material she introduces to her students , she shows her own love of wisdom—not as a performance , but as an actual engagement with necessity and the good that constitutes decreation . As Plato understood through the figure of Socrates , education is an erotic enterprise in which the desires of students are transformed by the beauty evident through the mediator—their teacher . But beauty makes its appearance only via the eclipse of the person who teaches ; her loving orientation must have the character of impersonality , by the mere definition of attention . In this light , Weil offers a further analogy for her teaching , one that , in this instance , does not involve her wholesale disappearance : To be what the pencil is for me when , blindfolded , I feel the table by means of its point—to be that for Christ . It is possible for us to be mediators between God and the part of creation which is confided to us . Our consent is necessary in order that he may perceive his own creation through us.11 It is not necessary to conclude from this that good teachers only teach explicitly religious matters , such as “ Christ ” or “ God. ” As we have seen , instruction of such religious concepts qua conceptualizations would of necessity be illusory , as they do not give themselves to us in that way . Weil ’ s point is that , as mere vehicles for the unfolding of reality , we must be wary of being taken as more than mediators . We are all familiar with the sort of teaching that centers on a “ cult of personality. ” Many talented and charismatic educators who take real interest in their students ’ lives and projects become , often despite their contrary intentions , the focus and motive for these students ’ academic energies . In many cases , apparent philosophical interest is sparked and maintained when the personality of the teacher captures the curiosities and imaginations of students whose interest in the subject , subsequently , becomes tied up with the teacher ’ s interest because it is the teacher ’ s . In Chapter 5 , we described the primary way in which the love of beauty can become perverted—namely , by “ getting stuck ” at the level of the physical , personal , and particular , rather than understanding that it is the gateway to divine beauty , beyond our imagination . The problem , then , with the cult of personality in teaching , is that students get “ stuck ” at this entry level of the personal , and their efforts become entirely wrapped up in accompanying superfluities , such as whether or not they are “ liked ” by their teacher , or how “ interesting ” or “ entertaining ” the teacher is , apart from any serious consideration of the problems presented . We do not intend to suggest that such distractions are always caused by the educator ; as with beautiful artworks , there is always sufficient capability in people for imaginative disfiguring and fictionalizing that even purity is no guarantee of an attentive observer . The educator finds herself in a paradoxical and precarious position . She realizes that she exemplifies a particular orientation that is at odds with much of the rest of the world , and that the purpose of education ( if we follow Plato and Weil ) is to inspire this ( re ) orientation in others . But can there be an impersonal exemplar ? Is not the exemplar , by definition , a particular person who has arrested the imaginations of others ? According to Anthony Steinbock , “ Exemplars are not norms , but ‘ personal models ’ on the basis of the value seen in the content of the exemplar. ” 12 But an educator who embodies the supernatural orientation of attention will not handle the material in her lectures as material , strictly speaking , but as the living , changing , and life-impacting contradictions that call for continual struggle and even suffering . Education , despite what many students would like to believe and what many universities advertise , necessitates suffering : “ Suffering , teaching and transformation . What is necessary is not that the initiated should learn something , but that a transformation should come about in them which makes them capable of receiving the teaching. ” 13 As we have seen , becoming attentive from a state of dispersion and distraction is crucifying , in that it demands self-renunciation . Becoming a genuine student , just like becoming a genuine educator , is a process of decreation . Thus if we approach our lectures with a certain lack of self-consciousness—not stupidity , and not false innocence , but a complete investment in the themes being discussed , and moreover , with a hunger for truth—students will most likely imitate this direction as well and become equally and impersonally invested in the problems ; the light that emanates through the void can not be consumed . In such cases , our exemplar has become , paradoxically , an “ impersonal model ” of attentiveness , effaced and anonymous in the sense that her personal characteristics or quirks are no longer “ given , ” but instead , her methods and meditations are seen—which are not , properly speaking , hers . In this way , the orientation is “ supernatural ” while also thereby representing “ true philosophy ” because it “ doesn ’ t construct anything ; its object is already provided , ” 14 though not given to us immediately . There is “ a special way of waiting upon truth , ” 15 therefore , that counters our tendency—whether as students or teachers—to be too hasty and active in seizing upon ideas , or in thinking that we can generate the final answers . ( At best , these will be temporary ; at worst , they will lull us into complacency . ) It is not that we stop searching or hungering when we wait , but we cease grasping impatiently for whatever “ byte ” of information comes our way and can fill in a false blank . Indeed , education was never , until just recently , about information at all . Students , in their turn , as they learn this practice of waiting , cease to think of their seemingly fruitless struggles in terms of “ dead time ” or “ wasted time. ” That is , they become attentive in their orientation and no longer fixate on the metaphorical finger pointing to the moon . Certain incentives also disappear from their energies : grades , accolades , career trajectories , potential earning power—in short , the very “ rewards ” that our university administrators promise to potential students , in selling education ( as a product , of course ) . Given these incentives that are so aggressively pawned onto students , it is nothing short of a miracle if they are eventually able to forget the soulless economy of corporatized education and come to recognize the “ need that their life should be a poem. ” 16 By addressing this need , which , in any case , will never do away with the tensions or the voids , we educators also enable students to be able to ask important questions . These questions are always genuine questions , never cynical or rhetorical . These questions , by the emptiness that gives rise to them , can give life and , by the decreative disposition that founds them , can be creative . Perhaps the most important question they are enabled to ask , according to Weil , is : “ What are you going through ? ” 17 If such a scenario sounds hopelessly idealistic , then we should also heed Weil ’ s words : “ An educational method which is not inspired by the conception of a certain form of human perfection is not worth very much. ” 18 This form of “ human perfection ” strongly resembles , we would argue , the impersonal exemplar who attends to the paradoxes of this world . In such a person , there would exist “ a focal point of greatness where the genius creating beauty , the genius revealing truth , heroism and holiness are indistinguishable. ” 19 It is important to remember that in contradistinction to the leader or authority of secular hierarchy , the exemplar has no followers but only “ ‘ emulators ’ in a relationship of emulation ” who come to love , esteem , hate , and scorn what the exemplar loves , esteems , et cetera.20 In light of this , it is easy to see why the exemplar is “ not a goal after which one strives ” but is rather the goal-determiner for the emulator.21 Weil underscores the importance of this particular role when she says , “ All men are ready to die for what they love . They differ only through the level of the thing loved and the concentration or diffusion of their love. ” 22 On this basis , a true pedagogy of paradox is possible . T. S. Eliot , who considered Weil to be a saint if not a genius , recognized that many will not agree with her views ; some , in fact , will violently disagree with them . “ But , ” he wrote , “ agreement and rejection are secondary : what matters is to make contact with a great soul. ” 23 In the case of Simone Weil , we , her readers , may expect a soul that eludes , frustrates , and even withdraws to the point of unrecognizability , but in this way , she carries us to impossible heights . NOTES Introduction 1FLN 147 . 2Alain Badiou , “ Language , Thought , Poetry , ” in Theoretical Writings , ed . and trans . Ray Brassier and Alberto Toscano ( London and New York : Continuum , 2006 ) , 239 . 3Ibid . 239–40 . 4NB 37 . 5NB 29 and WG 63 . 6Rainer Maria Rilke , The Notebooks of Malte Laurids Brigge , trans . Stephen Mitchell ( New York : Vintage International , 1990 ) . 7We borrow the metaphor of “ ripe fruit ” to describe the product of Rilke ’ s “ blood-remembering ” from John J. L. Mood . See : Rainer Maria Rilke , Rilke on Love and Other Difficulties , trans . with commentary John J. L. Mood ( New York : W.W. Norton & Company , 2004 ) , 111–13 . 8Ibid . 112–13 . Emphasis added . 9Ibid . 112 . 10Badiou , “ Language , Thought , Poetry , ” 241 . 11Ibid . 12Ibid . 13Ibid . 242 . 14Maurice Blanchot , The Infinite Conversation , trans . Susan Hanson ( Minneapolis and London : University of Minnesota Press , 1993 ) , 106 . 15GG 98 . 16Blanchot , The Infinite Conversation , 107 . 17Ibid . 108 . 18FLN 147 . 19WG 130 . 20Leslie Fiedler , “ Introduction , ” in WG xxvii . Chapter 1 1Sappho , The Poems , trans . Sasha Newborn ( Santa Barbara , CA : Bandana Books , 2000 ) , 27 . 2Gershom Scholem , On the Kabbalah and Its Symbolism , trans . Ralph Manheim ( New York : Schocken Books , 1996 ) , 32 . 3Ibid . 32–3 . 4Ibid . 5–6 . 5WG 47 . There exists a cottage industry of biographers and commentators who obsess over Weil ’ s Jewishness , or more generally attempt to psychologize her as a means of “ understanding ” her thought . With respect to the former obsession , many go so far as to insist that Weil ’ s relationship with her Jewish identity is the central question in coming to know her thought . See , for examples : Palle Yourgrau , Simone Weil ( London : Reaktion Books , 2011 ) , esp . Chapter 8 “ On the Jewish Question ” ; Thomas R. Nevin : Simone Weil : Portrait of a Self-exiled Jew ( Chapel Hill , NC : University of North Carolina Press , 1991 ) ; and Robert Coles , Simone Weil : A Modern Pilgrimage ( Woodstock , VT : Skylight Paths Publishing , 2001 ) , esp . Chapter 3 “ Her Jewishness. ” For an insightful discussion of the question of whether Weil could be “ released ” from her Jewish ethnicity by argument or otherwise , see Richard Bell , “ Simone Weil , Post-Holocaust Judaism , and the Way of Compassion , ” in Richard H. Bell , Simone Weil : The Way of Justice as Compassion ( New York : Rowan & Littlefield , 1998 ) , Chapter 9 . 6WG xv . We will take up Weil ’ s thinking about Judaism in the next chapter . 7Whereas Weil learned to read ancient Greek at an early age , she never really learned Hebrew—although she did go on to learn other languages in her study of religion , such as Sanskrit . 8WG 22 . 9Ibid . Emphasis added . 10Ibid . 24 . Emphasis added . 11See : Simone Pétrement , Simone Weil : A Life , trans . Raymond Rosenthal ( New York : Pantheon Books , 1976 ) and Gabriella Fiori , Simone Weil : An Intellectual Biography , trans . Joseph R. Berrigan ( Athens , GA : University of Georgia Press , 1989 ) . 12T . S. Eliot wrote , “ We must simply expose ourselves to the personality of a woman of genius , of a kind of genius akin to that of the saints ” ( “ Preface , ” in NR viii ) . Or , for instance , even her critic Emmanuel Levinas said of Weil , “ She lived like a saint and bore the suffering of the world ” ( Emmanuel Levinas , “ Simone Weil against the Bible , ” in Difficult Freedom : Essays on Judaism , trans . Seán Hand [ Baltimore , MD : The Johns Hopkins University Press , 1990 ] , 133 ) . Her niece , Sylvie Weil , has recently published an autobiographical account of her experiences growing up in the shadows of such a “ saint ” ; see : Sylvie Weil , At Home with André and Simone Weil , trans . Benjamin Ivry ( Evanston , IL : Northwestern University Press , 2010 ) . 13Leslie Fiedler , “ Introduction , ” in WG xv . Accounts of Weil ’ s childhood are especially prone to such flourish , reminiscent of stories of saints ’ divinely inspired speech and miracles . For example , Weil was a sickly child and in October 1913 she came down with influenza . She was ordered to lie still on her back for long periods of time . As Gabriella Fiori writes it , “ She does so ‘ without any complaint whatsoever , ’ as her dumbfounded mother observes ” ( Fiori , Simone Weil , 15 ; emphasis added ) . Or , in November 1914 , her mother Selma is again left speechless when her daughter—then aged five-and-a-half—was shivering cold while being bathed , calmed herself and asked , “ Why are you trembling you carcass ? ” ( Ibid. ) . 14WG 24 . Emphasis added . Elsewhere she writes , “ I have never once had , even for a moment , the feeling that God wants me to be in the Church . I have never even once had a feeling of uncertainty ” ( Ibid . 31 ) . 15See : E. Jane Doering , Simone Weil and the Specter of Self-Perpetuating Force ( Notre Dame , IN : University of Notre Dame Press , 2010 ) and Sylvie Courtine-Denamy , Three Women in Dark Times : Edith Stein , Hannah Arendt , and Simone Weil , trans . G. M. Goshgarian ( Ithaca , NY : Cornell University Press , 2000 ) . 16WG 142 . 17Well after her death , stories started to circulate that Weil had in fact been baptized by her close friend , Simone Deitz , in extremis on her deathbed . For a full account and analysis of the plausibility of this story , see : Eric O. Springsted , “ The Baptism of Simone Weil , ” in Spirit , Nature , and Community : Issues in the Thought of Simone Weil , Diogenes Allen and Eric . O. Springsted ( Albany , NY : State University of New York Press , 1994 ) , 3–18 . 18WG 4–5 . Later in the same letter she writes , “ I love the six or seven Catholics of genuine spirituality whom chance has led me to meet in the course of my life . I love the Catholic liturgy , hymns , architecture , rites , and ceremonies . But I have not the slightest love for the Church in the strict sense of the word , apart from its relation to all these things that I do love ” ( Ibid . 8 ) . 19 “ I think that only those who are above a certain level of spirituality can participate in the sacraments as such . . . I think I am below this level . . . I consider myself to be unworthy of the sacraments ” ( Ibid . 5 ) . 20Ibid . 21See : E. Jane Doering and Eric O. Springsted , eds , The Christian Platonism of Simone Weil ( Notre Dame , IN : University of Notre Dame Press , 2004 ) . 22Plato , Republic , BK VII in The Complete Works of Plato , ed . John M. Cooper ( Indianapolis , IN : Hackett , 1997 ) . 23GG 53 . 24Ibid . 55 . 25Ibid . 56 . Emphasis added . 26Ibid . 61 . 27Ibid . 115 . See also : Bartomeu Estelrich , “ Simone Weil on Modern Disequilibrium , ” in The Relevance of the Radical : Simone Weil 100 Years Later , ed . A. Rebecca Rozelle-Stone and Lucian Stone ( New York : Continuum , 2010 ) , 3–17 . 28LP 45 . 29It is useful to compare this point to what Freud wrote in his essay “ The Future of an Illusion ” namely : “ Where questions of religion are concerned , people are guilty of every possible sort of dishonesty and intellectual misdemeanor . Philosophers stretch the meanings of words until they retain scarcely anything of their original sense . They give the name of ‘ God ’ to some vague abstraction which they have created for themselves. ” Sigmund Freud , The Freud Reader , ed . Peter Gay ( New York : W.W. Norton & Company , 1989 ) , 705 . 30GG 60 . 31 “ The Great Beast is the only object of idolatry , the only ersatz of God , the only imitation of something which is infinitely far from me and which is I myself ” ( Ibid . 164 ) . 32Ibid . 57 . 33Plato , Phaedo , 64a in Complete Works . 34LP 44 . 35Ibid . 38–9 . 36GG 165 . 37Cf . n. 28 . 38Plato , Republic , BK VI , esp . 493a–4a . 39Plato , Republic , BK VI , 494a in Complete Works , 1116 . 40Plato , Republic , BK VI , 493b–c , 1115 . Emphasis added . 41It is worth noting Neil Postman ’ s interpretation contrasting George Orwell ’ s and Aldous Huxley ’ s dystopian novels , 1984 and Brave New World respectively . He feared that Huxley was more correct than Orwell in that the latter envisioned an external force would be required to suppress free thinking and activity , whereas the former , Huxley , thought that it would be those very things that humans enjoy—are amused by—that will lead to their own undermining . See : Neil Postman , Amusing Ourselves to Death : Public Discourse in the Age of Show Business ( New York , Penguin , 1985 ) , vii–viii . 42GG 166 . 43 “ A crowd—not this crowd or that , the crowd now living or the crowd long deceased , a crowd of humble people or of superior people , of rich or of poor , & c.—a crowd in its very concept is the untruth , by reason of the fact that it renders the individual completely impenitent and irresponsible , or at least weakens his sense of responsibility by reducing it to a fraction. ” Søren Kierkegaard , The Point of View for my Work as an Author : A Report to History and Related Writings , trans . Walter Lowrie ( New York : Harper & Brothers , 1962 ) , 112 . 44GG 165 . 45WG 11 . 46Ibid . 5 . 47GG 166 . 48SWA 235 . 49Matthew 4:8–11 . 50WG 12 . 51For an incisive philosophical discussion of the self-help movement , see Charles Guignon , On Being Authentic ( New York : Routledge , 2004 ) . 52GG 167 . 53As Alain Badiou writes , “ The very idea of a consensual ‘ ethics ’ . . . is a powerful contributor to subjective resignation and acceptance of the status quo. ” Alain Badiou , Ethics , trans . Peter Hallward ( New York : Verso , 2001 ) , 32 . 54See Chapter 2 for an extensive treatment of Weil ’ s ideas concerning other religious traditions . 55WG 32 . 56Ibid . 12 . 57For a detailed account of the historical tracings of Weil ’ s thought as a direct response to the rise of Hitlerism , see Doering , Simone Weil , Chapter 3 . 58 WG 37 . See also her remarks : “ I should like to draw your attention to one point . It is here that there is an absolutely insurmountable obstacle to the Incarnation of Christianity . It is the use of the two little words anathema sit . It is not their existence , but the way they have been employed up till now . It is that also which prevents me from crossing the threshold of the Church ” ( WG 33 ) and “ The Thomist conception of faith implies a ‘ totalitarianism ’ as stifling as that of Hitler , if not more so . For the mind gives its complete adherence , not only to what the Church has recognized as being strictly necessary to faith , but furthermore to whatever it shall at any time recognize as being such , the intelligence has perforce to be gagged and reduced to carrying out servile tasks ” ( LP 38–9 ) . 59Doering , Simone Weil , 78 . 60 “ [ A ] nation as such can not be the object of supernatural love . It has no soul . It is a Great Beast ” ( GG 169 ) . 61Elsewhere Weil emphasizes the point that behind identitarian abstractions “ there is an actual human group ” ; that is , there are real human beings who breathe , suffer , and die ( SWA 235 ) . 62A fruitful comparison can be made between Weil ’ s thinking on this issue and Albert Camus ’ . In his “ Letters to a German , ” Camus argues that one can love one ’ s country , but , for him , true patriotism requires that citizens “ conquer themselves first. ” As he writes , “ I can not believe that everything must be subordinated to a single end . There are means that can not be excused . And I should like to be able to love my country and still love justice. ” Albert Camus , “ Letters to a German , ” in Resistance , Rebellion , and Death , trans . Justin O ’ Brien ( New York : Vintage , 1974 ) , 5–6 . 63GG 169 . 64WG 11 . Again , this is reminiscent of Camus who wrote , “ We had much to overcome—and , first of all , the constant temptation to emulate you [ Nazis ] . For there is always something in us that yields to instinct , to contempt for intelligence , to the cult of efficiency . Our great virtues eventually become tiresome to us . We become ashamed of our intelligence , and sometimes we imagine some barbarous state where truth would be effortless ” ( Camus , “ Letters to a German , ” 7 ) . 65SWA 221 . 66Ibid . 67Ibid . 222 . Emphasis added . See also : A. Rebecca Rozelle-Stone and Lucian Stone , “ The ‘ War ’ on Error ? Violent Metaphor and Words with Capital Letters , ” in The Relevance of the Radical : Simone Weil 100 Years Later , ed . A. Rebecca Rozelle-Stone and Lucian Stone ( New York : Continuum , 2010 ) , 139–58 . 68Hannah Arendt , On Violence ( New York : Harvest , 1970 ) , 65 . 69GG 53 . 70Ibid . 115 . 71Ibid . 114 . At the age of twenty-one , Weil wrote a dissertation titled , “ Science and Perception in Descartes , ” under the direction of the influential French philosopher and educator Émile Chartier ( 1868–1951 ) in which she performs her own version of the Cartesian meditations . See FW 31–88 . 72See especially , Jean-Luc Marion , Being Given : Toward a Phenomenology of Givenness , trans . Jeffrey L. Kosky ( Stanford , CA : Stanford University Press , 2002 ) . 73See : Anthony J. Steinbock , Phenomenology & Mysticism : The Verticality of Religious Experience ( Bloomington : Indiana University Press , 2007 ) . 74LP 62 . 75Ibid . 76WG 22 . 77Ibid . 28 . 78Simone Weil , “ A Few Reflections on the Notion of Value , ” trans . E. Jane Doering in Cahiers Simone Weil XXXIV ( 4 ) ( December ) 2011 , 459–60 . 79GG 60 . 80Cf . n. 16 . 81WG 13 . She writes elsewhere : “ I am afraid of the Church patriotism existing in Catholic circles ” ( WG 12 ) . 82See Bernard McGinn , The Foundations of Mysticism : Origins to the Fifth Century , vol . 2 of The Presence of God ( New York : Crossroad , 2005 ) , Chapter 5 . 83WG 34 . 84Ibid . 34–5 . 85Ibid . 86Ibid . 87Ibid . 88Steinbock , Phenomenology & Mysticism , 6 . 89 “ The metaphor of the ‘ veil ’ or the ‘ reflection ’ applied by the mystics to faith enables them to escape from this suffocating atmosphere . They accept the Church ’ s teaching , not as the truth , but as something behind which the truth is to be found ” ( LP 39 ) . 90Steinbock , Phenomenology & Mysticism , 1 . 91Ibid . 4 . 92WG 22 . 93Ibid . 27 . 94Weil , “ A Few Reflections on the Notion of Value , ” 461 . 95 “ I wish and implore that my imperfection may be wholly revealed to me in so far as human thought is capable of grasping it . Not in order that it may be cured but , even if it should not be cured , in order that I may know the truth ” ( GG 58 ) . 96A contemporary cynic might “ diagnose ” her psychologically as a masochist . But if we are to believe her own account , then we must dismiss this type of speculation . As she writes , “ I do not mean , of course , that I have a preference for orders of this [ hellish ] nature . I am not perverse like that ” ( WG 31 ) . 97Ibid . 25 . 98Ibid . 26 . 99Ibid . 100Ibid . 101Ibid . 102Ibid . 103Ibid . 104Ibid . 27 . 105Ibid . 27 . 106Weil , “ A Few Reflections on the Notion of Value , ” 462 . The French philosopher Pierre Hadot has lamented the historical shift in how philosophers have come to perceive and practice philosophy in contemporary time . See : Philosophy as a Way of Life , ed . Arnold I. Davidson ( Oxford : Blackwell , 1995 ) and What is Ancient Philosophy ? , trans . Michael Chase ( Cambridge , MA : Belknap Press of Harvard University Press , 2002 ) . 107Plato , Phaedrus , 249d , in Complete Works , 527 . 108WG 27 . 109Ibid . 28 . Chapter 2 1Martin Buber , I and Thou , trans . Walter Kaufmann ( New York : Touchstone Books , 1996 ) , 123 . 2LP 9 . 3Ibid . 9–10 . Emphasis added . 4Ibid . 55 . 5GG 19 . 6Ibid . 89 . 7Ibid . 20 . She also writes , “ Deprivation of the future—void , loss of equilibrium . That is why ‘ to philosophise is to learn to die. ’ That is why ‘ to pray is like a death ’ ” ( Ibid. ) . 8Ibid . 91 . Similarly she writes , “ When the whole universe weighs upon us there is no other counterweight possible but God himself—the true God , for in this case false gods can not do anything , not even under the name of the true one . Evil is infinite in the sense of being indefinite : matter , space , time . Nothing can overcome this kind of infinity except true infinity . That is why on the balance of the cross a body which is frail and light which was God , lifted up the whole world . ‘ Give me a point of leverage and I will lift up the whole world. ’ This point of leverage is the cross . There can be no other . It has to be at the intersection of the world and that which is not the world . The cross is this intersection ” ( Ibid . 93 ) . 9Weil writes , “ To be just it is necessary to be naked and dead—without imagination , ” and “ [ t ] hat is why the model of justice has to be naked and dead . The cross alone is not open to imaginary imitation ” ( Ibid . 88 ) . 10Ibid . 90 . 11Ibid . 87 . 12Ibid . 88 . 13Ibid . 87 . 14Ibid . 15In the following passage she emphasizes the correlation between God and necessity : “ From human misery to God . But not as a compensation or consolation . As a correlation ” ( Ibid . 91 ) . 16Ibid . 90 . 17Ibid . 88–9 . 18Ibid . 88 . Emphasis added . 19Ibid . 89 . 20 “ Christ is the proportional mean between God and the Saints . The very word mediation indicates this ” ( LP 24 ) . 21GG 90 . 22LP 70 . 23Perhaps not coincidentally , of late there has been a surge of interest in political theology . See , for example : Giorgio Agamben , The Kingdom and the Glory : For a Theological Genealogy of Economy and Government , trans . Lorenzo Chiesa ( Stanford , CA : Stanford University Press , 2011 ) ; Simon Critchley , The Faith of the Faithless : Experiments in Political Theology ( London : Verso , 2012 ) ; and Clayton Crockett , Radical Political Theology : Religion and Politics After Liberalism ( New York : Columbia University Press , 2011 ) . For a comprehensive overview of Weil ’ s ideas concerning colonialism see the wonderful collection of letters and essays translated and edited by J. P. Little , Simone Weil on Colonialism : An Ethic of the Other ( New York : Rowman and Littlefield , 2003 ) . Arguably the colonial mindset persists . The occupation of sovereign nation states by Western powers ( e.g. , Iraq and Afghanistan ) , calls for regime change , and other aggressive steps pursuing Western hegemony have been accompanied by Christian missionary discourses . Beginning with former president George W. Bush ’ s use of the term “ crusade ” to describe the American invasions of Afghanistan and Iraq , to the abundance of reports exposing the conjoining of evangelical Christianity with the US military ’ s missions in these Islamic countries ( including evidence of the spreading of anti-Islamic propaganda and Christian proselytizing ) , it is clear that the Western imagination remains wedded to what Weil diagnoses as an unholy alliance between religion and the state . For example , it has been reported that some US military personnel serving in Afghanistan and Iraq wear patches reading “ Pork Eating Crusader ” around a picture of a medieval knight with a red cross on his breastplate eating a leg of pork or a patch that reads “ Infidel ” in both Arabic and English ( Eric German , “ Sewing Discord : American Troops are in the Market for Patches that Mock the Muslim Faith , ” The Daily , March 18 , 2012 ( www.thedaily.com/page/2012/03/18/031812-news-infidel-gear-1–2/ ) . 24LP 31–2 . Emphasis added . 25Ibid . 30 . Emphasis added . 26SWC 108 . Emphasis added . In her letter to Father Couturier she writes , “ The missionaries—even the martyrs amongst them—are too closely accompanied by guns and battleships for them to be true witnesses of the Lamb ” ( LP 33 ) . 27GG 87 . 28In The Need for Roots , she writes , “ Uprootedness occurs whenever there is a military conquest , and in this sense conquest is nearly always an evil ” ( NR 44 ) . 29LP 33 . 30Ibid . 30 . 31Ibid . 29 . Emphasis added . 32In 1995 , Robin Wright wrote an article in The Guardian calling the Iranian philosopher Abdolkarim Soroush , “ the Martin Luther of Islam. ” This and related sentiments have become a common refrain in the Western media , academic circles , and during ecumenical dialogues . See : Robin Wright , “ An Iranian Luther Shakes the Foundations of Islam , ” The Guardian , February 1 , 1995 ( reprinted and retrieved from : www.drsoroush.com/English/News_Archive/E-NWS-19950201–1.html ) . For a scholarly assessment of just how far Soroush ’ s philosophy truly “ shakes the foundations of Islam , ” see , Hamid Dabashi , “ Blindness and Insight : The Predicament of a Muslim Intellectual , ” in Iran : Between Tradition and Modernity , ed . Ramin Jahanbegloo ( New York : Lexington Books , 2004 ) , 95–116 . 33LP 65 . Statements like this have led some scholars to suggest that Weil was perhaps influenced by and , thus , numbered among the Perennial Philosophy movement ( Philosophia Perennis , also commonly referred to as Traditionalist Philosophy ) . See , for example , Frithjof Schuon , The Transcendent Unity of Religions , with an Introduction by Huston Smith ( Wheaton , IL : Quest , 1993 ) . The direct link drawn between Weil and Perennial Philosophy is through her relationship with René Daumal ( 1908–44 ) , who loaned her books on Sanskrit grammar , the Bhagavad Gita , and other works related to Hindu philosophy and who assisted her studies ( See : Pétrement , Simone Weil , 394 , and 421–2 ) . Xavier Accart has made the connection between Weil and the influential Perennial Philosopher René Guénon . See : “ Simone Weil découvre l ’ œuvre de Guénon par l ’ intermédiaire de Daumal , ” in Xavier Accart , Guénon ou le renversement des clartés : Influence d ’ un métaphysicien sur la vie littéraire et intellectuelle française ( 1920–1970 ) ( Paris : Edidit – Milan : Archè , 2005 ) , 607ff . 34WG 118 . 35Ibid . 118–19 . 36LP 33–4 . Emphasis added . 37WG 136 . 38For a thorough and insightful account of Weil ’ s reading of the Bhagavad Gita , see : “ Simone Weil and the Bhagavad-Gita , ” Chapter 6 of Doering , Simone Weil , 151–82 . 39In the letter to Father Couturier she writes , “ Zeus , in the Iliad , orders no cruelty whatever ” ( LP 13 ) . Posthumously , two collections of her essays were published , which elaborate her readings of ancient Greek texts and teachings ranging from the Iliad , Antigone , various writings of Plato , and Pythagoreanism : Le Source Grecque and Les Intuitions Pré-chrétiennes . A collection of representative writings from these sources has been translated into English as Intimations of Christianity among the Ancient Greeks , trans . E. C. Geissbuhler ( London : Routledge , 1988 ) , as well as On Science , Necessity , and the Love of God , trans . Richard Rees ( London : Oxford University Press , 1968 ) . 40She revered the ancient Egyptian sacred writings ; for example , she writes , “ The Egyptian Book of the Dead , at least three thousand years old , and doubtless very much older , is filled with evangelic charity ” ( LP 13 ) . Or , later in her letter , she elaborates extensively : “ His words : ‘ I am the Way ’ should be compared with the Chinese ‘ Tao , ’ a word signifying literally ‘ the way ’ and metaphorically , on the one hand the method of salvation , and on the other hand the impersonal God who is the God of Chinese spirituality , but who , although impersonal , is the model for the wise and acts continually . His words : ‘ I am the Truth ’ call to mind Osiris , Lord of Truth . When in one of his most important teachings he says : ‘ They which do the truth , ’ he uses an expression which is not a Greek one , and which , as far as I know , is not a Hebrew one ( must verify this ) . On the other hand , it is an Egyptian one . Maât means at the same time justice and truth . That is significant . No doubt it is not for nothing that the Holy family went down into Egypt ” ( Ibid . 27–8 ) . 41Weil writes , “ Greek mythology is full of prophecies ; so are the stories drawn from European folklore , what are known as fairy tales ” ( Ibid . 20 ) , and elsewhere she adds , “ Any number of accounts drawn from mythology and folklore could be translated into Christian truths without forcing or deforming anything in them , but rather , on the contrary , thus throwing a vivid light upon them . And these truths , would in their turn , thereby take on new clarity ” ( Ibid . 28–9 ) . 42Ibid . 37 . 43This is the basic logic of Perennial philosophy , Cf . fn . 32 . See , Schuon , The Transcendent Unity of Religions . 44LP 47 . 45Ibid . 17–18 . Emphasis added . 46Cf . fn . 37 ( IC ) . 47Cf . fn . 30 . 48LP 16 . 49Ibid . 19 . 50Part of her letter to Thibon has been reproduced in his introduction to Gravity and Grace ( GG xiii–xv ) . Particularly noteworthy is the following passage : “ I do not know whether I have already said it to you , but as to my notebooks , you can read whatever passages you like from them to whomever you like , but you must leave none of them in the hands of anyone else ” ( Ibid . xiv ) . 51Thomas Nevin argues that “ nothing Weil wrote can safely be extracted as though it had attained resolution ” in Simone Weil : Portrait of a Self-exiled Jew , 454 . Nevin ’ s “ Bibliographical Essay ” in his volume , pages 453–78 , is an extremely useful reference for those interested in Weil studies . 52Nevin , Simone Weil : Portrait of a Self-exiled Jew , 454 . 53Lawrence E. Schmidt , “ Simone Weil ’ s Understanding of Judaism Considered in the Context of Eric Voegelin ’ s Israel and Revelation , A Reflection Inspired by Palle Yourgrau , ” unpublished essay presented at the 32nd Annual Colloquy of the American Weil Society held at the University of Notre Dame , March 22–5 , 2012 . 54David Tracy , “ Simone Weil : The Impossible , ” in The Christian Platonism of Simone Weil , ed . E. Jane Doering and Eric O. Springsted ( Notre Dame , IN : University of Notre Dame Press , 2004 ) , 231 . 55Lawrence E. Schmidt , “ Simone Weil ’ s Understanding of Judaism Considered in the Context of Eric Voegelin ’ s Israel and Revelation , A Reflection Inspired by Palle Yourgrau. ” 56Levinas , “ Simone Weil against the Bible , ” 133 . Emphasis added . 57GG 77 . 58One exception to this observation is found in her Notebooks . There she acknowledges that , “ there is a Mohammedan esotericism [ Sufism ] . ” However , she goes on to claim , “ There must also be a Christian influence by way of Byzantium ” ( NB 102 ) . In other words , the one positive light in Islam—its mystical tradition—she reckoned must be due to the external influence of Christianity . 59Levinas , “ Simone Weil against the Bible , ” 135 . Levinas also writes , “ She contrasts the Bible , which she knows poorly , with ‘ chosen bits ’ of civilizations foreign to Europe . Although ‘ digestible ’ texts fill the Old Testament , she treats them as exceptions and attributes them to strangers , but with a disconcerting generosity goes into ecstasies over the slightest trace of the Divine , which crosses distant worlds like the Moon ” ( 136 ) . 60LP 16 . 61Although she found sections and some figures within Jewish sacred literature redeemable—Abel , Enoch , Noah , Melchisedek ( GG 159 ) , as well as “ Isaiah , Job , the Song of Solomon , Daniel , Tobias , part of Ezekiel , part of the Psalms , part of the Books of Wisdom , the beginning of Genesis . . . ” ( LP 64 ) —she concludes , “ The rest is indigestible , because it is lacking in an essential truth which lies at the heart of Christianity and which the Greeks understood perfectly well—namely , the possibility of the innocent suffering affliction . In the eyes of the Hebrews . . .sin and affliction , virtue and prosperity go hand-in-hand , which turns Jehovah into an earthly not a heavenly Father , visible and not invisible . He is thus a false god ” ( Ibid. ) . But as Levinas rightly notes , “ she treats [ the Scriptures ] as historical books whenever they support her thesis , and false whenever they disturb it ” ( Levinas , “ Simone Weil against the Bible , ” 135 ) . 62GG 161 . Similarly she writes , “ Israel was an attempt at supernatural social life ” ( Ibid . 160 ) . 63 “ Israel stood up to Rome because its God , even though immaterial , was a temporal sovereign on par with the Emperor . . . ” ( Ibid . 161 ) . 64FLN 214 . 65Ibid . 66Ibid . 67NB 102 . 68LP 14–15 . 69Levinas , “ Simone Weil against the Bible , ” 134 . 70GG 160 . 71Abraham Joshua Heschel , The Prophets ( Peabody , MA : Hendrickson Publishers , 2009 ) , viii . 72Gil Anidjar , The Jew , the Arab : A History of the Enemy ( Stanford , CA : Stanford University Press , 2003 ) . 73Matthew 10:36 . Anidjar discusses the particular use Augustine makes of this biblical verse in City of God ; see , Anidjar , The Jew , the Arab , 20ff . 74Anidjar , The Jew , the Arab , 38 . The quote from Aquinas in this passage is from St. Thomas Aquinas , Summa contra Gentiles , trans . A. C. Pegis et al . ( Notre Dame , IN : University of Notre Dame Press , 1975 ) , I.2 as quoted in Anidjar . 75GG 161 . 76Levinas , “ Simone Weil against the Bible , ” 140 . 77Doering , Simone Weil , 73 . 78Ibid . 78 . Emphasis added . 79GG 167 . 80Doering , Simone Weil , 78–9 . Emphasis added . 81GG 172 . 82WG 94 . 83Ibid . 95 . Emphasis added . 84LP 38 , 39–40 . Emphasis added . 85Ibid . 40 . 86Gerhard Kittel , ed. , Theological Dictionary of the New Testament , ed . and trans . Geoffrey W. Bromiley ( Grand Rapids , MI : WM . B. Eerdmans Publishing , 1964 ) , 354 . It is also interesting to note that the Hebrew term herem ( related to the Arabic word haram ) is translated as anathema in Greek ; see , G. Johannes Botterweck and Helmer Ringgren , Theological Dictionary of the Old Testament , vol . V , trans . David E. Green ( Grand Rapids , MI : WM . B. Eerdmans Publishing , 1986 ) , 182 . We are thankful to our colleague Charles Miller for his assistance in clarifying these points . 87Here there is an important distinction between Weil ’ s treatment of Islam and Judaism . She spares Islam any blameworthiness for the corruptions of Christianity , in particular , and even to modernity to a large extent . Because Christianity has inherited much of its civilization from the Roman Empire and Judaism , however , the latter receives the majority of her attention and the full brunt of her critique . 88In her Notebooks she writes , “ [ Jesus ] came into Israel—and his disciples were spread abroad in the Roman world—because up to then Israel and Rome had been denied any veritable revelation ” ( NB 103 ) . 89GG 162 . 90Ibid . 160 . “ Christendom has become totalitarian , conquering , and exterminating , because it has not developed the idea of God ’ s absence and non-activity here below . It has attached itself to Jehovah no less than to Christ , and conceived of Providence in the manner of the Old Testament ” ( Ibid . 159 ) . 91Ibid . 162 . 92Weil contends that a prevalent yet mistaken theology of Christianity can be attributed to the fact that it worships YHWH , not Christ . She writes , “ Christendom has become totalitarian , conquering , and exterminating , because it has not developed the idea of God ’ s absence and non-activity here below . It has attached itself to Jehovah no less than to Christ , and conceived of Providence in the manner of the Old Testament . Only Israel could stand up to Rome , because it resembled it ; and this is how the birth of Christianity was marked with the Roman stain before it became the official religion of the Empire ” ( Ibid . 159 ; emphasis added ) . 93Pétrement , Simone Weil , 390 . 94SWR 79 . 95Ibid . 80 . 96Ibid . 97Ibid . 98Ibid . 99Ibid . 100Ibid . 81 . 101Pétrement , Simone Weil , 392 . 102Ibid . 103Levinas , “ Simone Weil against the Bible , ” 133 . 104Ibid . 140 . 105Ibid . 135 . 106WG 118–19 . Emphasis added . 107Levinas , “ Simone Weil against the Bible , ” 134 . 108The lectures as well as transcripts from the ensuing discussions between these figures have since been published : Eduardo Mendieta and Jonathan Vanantwerpen , eds , The Power of Religion in the Public Sphere ( New York : Columbia University Press , 2011 ) . 109Judith Butler , “ Is Judaism Zionism ? ” in Eduardo Mendieta and Jonathan Vanantwerpen , eds , The Power of Religion in the Public Sphere ( New York : Columbia University Press , 2011 ) , 70–91 . 110Jewish authored literature on these issues is growing exponentially . See for examples : Peter Beinart , The Crisis of Zionism ( New York : Times Books , 2012 ) ; Ilan Pappe , The Ethnic Cleansing of Palestine ( Oxford : Oneworld , 2006 ) ; Gabriel Piterberg , The Returns of Zionism : Myths , Politics and Scholarship in Israel ( London : Verso , 2008 ) ; and Shlomo Sand , The Invention of the Jewish People ( London : Verso , 2009 ) . 111Butler , “ Is Judaism Zionism ? ” 73 . 112Ibid . 77 . 113Ibid . 83 . 114Ibid . 74 . 115Levinas , “ Simone Weil against the Bible , ” 139 . 116Butler , “ Is Judaism Zionism ? ” 84 . 117Ibid . 88 . Chapter 3 1Blaise Pascal , Pensées , trans . A. J. Krailsheimer ( London : Penguin Books , 1995 ) , 212–13 . 2WG 88 . 3GG 32 . 4WG 89 . 5NB 234 . 6GG 32–3 . 7Ibid . 64 . 8WG 89 . 9NB 236 . 10GG 10 . Emphasis added . 11Cf . Guignon , On Being Authentic . 12NB 421 . See also NB 471–2 . Freud wrote , for example : “ The erotic instincts appear to be altogether more plastic , more readily diverted and displaced than the destructive instincts. ” He later described erotic cathexes as having “ a peculiar indifference in regard to the object. ” Sigmund Freud , “ The Ego and the Id , ” in The Freud Reader , 649 . 13See , for example : Ibid . 639 , 649–50 . 14Ibid . 649 . Weil is unequivocal in her views of Freud ’ s theory : “ Only in the stupidity of the present day could the idea of sublimation arise ” ( GG 63 ) . 15Freud , “ Civilization and Its Discontents , ” The Freud Reader , 728 . 16Freud , “ Beyond the Pleasure Principle , ” The Freud Reader , 622 . 17Plato , Symposium , 189e–92e . 18Anne Carson , Eros : The Bittersweet ( Champaign , IL : Dalkey Archive , 2000 ) , 68 . 19Plato , Symposium , 205e–6a , in Complete Works , 488–9 . Emphasis added . 20Iris Murdoch , Metaphysics as a Guide to Morals ( New York : Penguin Books , 1992 ) , 502 . 21NB 236 . 22GG 7 . 23SWR 90 . 24GG 16 . 25Pascal , Pensées , 37–8 . 26GG 16 . 27Ibid . 3 . 28Ibid . 2–3 . 29Rainer Maria Rilke , “ Imaginary Career , ” The Selected Poetry of Rainer Maria Rilke ( New York : Vintage International , 1989 ) , 259 . 30GG 7 . 31Murdoch , Metaphysics as a Guide to Morals , 502–3 . 32GG 61 . 33Pascal , Pensées , 38–9 . Emphasis added . 34SWA 52 . 35Ibid . 36GG 6 . 37Ibid . 712 . 38Ibid . 73 , 72 . 39Ibid . 73 . 40On this point , a useful comparison may be made to Hannah Arendt ’ s notion of “ the banality of evil. ” See Hannah Arendt , Eichmann in Jerusalem : A Report on the Banality of Evil ( New York : Penguin , 1964 ) . 41GG 69 . 42Ibid . For further discussion of false imitation of God ( ersatz divinity ) , see Chapter 1 . 43Ibid . 70 . 44Ibid . 76–7 . 45Ibid . 77 . 46In an unpublished article titled “ Gravity and Grace as ‘ Trends ’ of the Being and the Soul , ” presented at the 32nd Annual Colloquy of the American Weil Society , University of Notre Dame , March 23 , 2012 , Emmanuel Gabellieri has convincingly argued that rather than being identified with good and evil respectively , grace and gravity appear in Weil ’ s works as “ conditions of existence and at some other times as effects of freedom ” ( 2 ) . 47SWR 90 . 48GG 77 . 49Miklos Vetö , The Religious Metaphysics of Simone Weil , trans . Joan Dargan ( Albany , NY : SUNY , 1994 ) , 11 . 50GG 32 . 51Ibid . 52NB 469 . 53WG 61 . She writes , “ Attention [ one manifestation of decreation ] is an effort , the greatest of all efforts perhaps , but it is a negative effort. ” 54GG 26 . 55Ibid . 62 . 56Ibid . 33 . 57Ibid . 58NB 82 . 59Ibid . 83 . 60GG 40 . 61NB 87 . 62GG 40 . 63SNL 160 . 64GG 70 . 65Ibid . 66SNL 162 . 67Ibid . 160 . 68WG 77 . 69Ibid . Chapter 4 1Sophocles , Antigone , as seen in Sophocles I : Oedipus the King , Oedipus at Colonus , Antigone , 2nd edn , trans . David Grene ( Chicago : University of Chicago Press , 1991 ) , 192 . 2Irving Singer , The Nature of Love 1 : Plato to Luther ( Cambridge , MA : MIT Press , 2009 ) , 47 . 3SNL 89 . 4Anne Carson notes that “ in the popular moral thinking of the day [ ancient Greece ] , self-control or sophrosyne [ was ] the rule of an enlightened life. ” She goes on to argue , as do we , that ultimately , Socrates subverts this norm , vindicating the takeover of eros as a divine mania . Eros : The Bittersweet , 154 . 5Weil writes , “ . . . It is God alone who comes down and possesses the soul , but desire alone draws God down . . . . Attention is an effort , the greatest of all efforts perhaps , but it is a negative effort ” ( WG 61 ) . 6SWA 69 . 7SNL 105 . 8SWA 72 . 9Plato , Phaedrus , 244a , in Complete Works , 522 . 10SNL 106 . 11Singer , The Nature of Love , 84–5 . 12Rush Rhees , Discussions of Simone Weil , ed . D. Z. Phillips ( Albany , NY : SUNY , 2000 ) , 110 . 13Plato writes , “ It follows that Love must be a lover of wisdom and , as such , is in between being wise and being ignorant , ” 204b , in Complete Works , 487 . 14Singer , The Nature of Love , 48–9 . 15Plato , Phaedrus , 257a , in Complete Works , 533 . 16Singer , The Nature of Love , 63 . 17Ibid . 18Plato , Phaedrus , 251a–b , in Complete Works , 528 . 19SNL 118 . 20Plato , Symposium , 219a , in Complete Works , 500 . 21SNL 126 . 22Ibid . 126–7 . 23Ibid . 127 . 24Ibid . 25GG 124 . 26Michel Foucault , Discipline and Punish : The Birth of the Prison , 2nd edn , trans . Alan Sheridan ( New York : Vintage , 1995 ) , 25 . 27Aristotle , Nicomachean Ethics , 2nd edn , trans . Terence Irwin ( Indianapolis , IN : Hackett , 1999 ) , 110–11 . 28Susan Peake , Lenore Manderson , and Helen Potts , “ ‘ Part and Parcel of Being a Woman ’ : Female Urinary Incontinence and Constructions of Control , ” Medical Anthropology Quarterly 13 ( 3 ) , 279 . 29Ibid . 276 . Emphasis added . 30Susan Bordo , Unbearable Weight ( Berkeley : University of California Press , 1995 ) , 147–8 . 31Ibid . 148 . 32Elizabeth Grosz , “ Sexed Bodies , ” in Continental Feminism Reader , ed . Ann Cahill and Jennifer Hansen ( New York : Rowman and Littlefield , 2003 ) , 299 . 33Carson , Eros : The Bittersweet , 36 . 34NB 483 . 35GG 33 . 36NB 483 . 37bell hooks , “ Choosing the Margin as a Space of Radical Openness , ” in Women , Knowledge , and Reality : Explorations in Feminist Philosophy , 2nd edn , ed . Ann Garry and Marilyn Pearsall ( New York : Routledge , 1997 ) , 51 . 38NB 23 . 39SNL 106 . 40Refer to our discussion of Rilke ’ s notion of “ blood-remembering ” in the Introduction . 41GG 125 . 42Ibid . 87 . 43Ibid . 88 . 44SNL 127 . 45GG 123 . 46WG 79 . 47Ibid . 48Weil , “ A Few Reflections on the Notion of Value , ” 459 . 49WG 79 . 50Weil , “ A Few Reflections on the Notion of Value , ” 459 . 51WG 78 . 52GG 91 . 53Carson , Eros : The Bittersweet , 155 . 54Ibid . 55Carson tells us : “ Change of self is loss of self , according to the traditional Greek attitude . Categorized as madness , it is held to be an unquestionable evil . . . Wings , in traditional poetry , are the mechanism by which Eros swoops upon the unsuspecting lover to wrest control of his person and personality . Wings are an instrument of damage and a symbol of irresistible power . When you fall in love , change sweeps through you on wings and you can not help but lose your grip on that cherished entity , your self ” ( Eros : The Bittersweet , 154 , 155–6 ) . 56GG 63 . 57Weil , “ A Few Reflections on the Notion of Value , ” 459 . 58bell hooks , “ Choosing the Margin as a Space of Radical Openness , ” 49 . 59GG 126–7 . 60WG 61 , 62 . 61SNL 121 . 62GG 120 . 63Huston Smith , The World ’ s Religions ( New York : HarperCollins , 1991 ) , 339 . 64GG 55 . This statement also implies a critique of Pascal ’ s Wager . While Pascal admits that we are “ incapable of knowing either what [ God ] is or whether he is , ” he argues that we must wager that God exists because this choice aligns most with our interests and has the most potential for increasing ( and not decreasing ) our future happiness . Pascal , Pensées , 122 . Thus , such an orientation to God , for Weil , would be purely based on self-interest and hence “ greedy. ” 65GG 149 . 66Ibid . 53 . 67Weil , “ A Few Reflections on the Notion of Value , ” 460 . 68Sara Ruddick , “ Injustice in Families : Assault and Domination , ” in Justice and Care : Essential Readings in Feminist Ethics , ed . Virginia Held ( Boulder , CO : Westview , 1995 ) , 212 . 69Ibid . 212–13 . 70We will explain the relationship between beauty and Weilienne attention in more detail in the next chapter . 71Peggy McIntosh , “ White Privilege , Male Privilege , ” in Applied Ethics : A Multicultural Approach , 4th edn , ed . Larry May , Shari Collins-Chobanian , and Kai Wong ( Alexandria , VA : Prentice Hall , 2005 ) , 454 . 72Ibid . 456 . 73Sara Ruddick , Maternal Thinking : Toward a Politics of Peace ( Boston : Beacon , 1995 ) , 122 . 74SNL 109 . 75WG 100 . 76Ibid . 77SWA 52 . Emphasis added . 78GG 105 . 79WG 86–7 . 80Ruddick , “ Injustice in Families , ” 204 . 81WG 85 . 82See Guy Debord ’ s Society of the Spectacle , trans . Donald Nicholson-Smith ( New York : Zone Books , 1995 ) . 83SNL 109 . 84For instance , Theodor Adorno writes , “ The masochistic mass culture is the necessary manifestation of almighty production itself . When the feelings seize on exchange value it is no mystical transubstantiation . It corresponds to the behavior of the prisoner who loves his cell because he has been left nothing else to love. ” Theodor Adorno , The Culture Industry ( New York : Routledge , 2001 ) , 40 . 85GG 63 . 86Steven J. Sandage , T. W. Wiens , and C. M. Dahl , “ Humility and Attention : The Contemplative Psychology of Simone Weil , ” Journal of Psychology and Christianity 20 ( 4 ) ( 2001 ) , 364 . 87FLN 260 . Emphasis added . 88Ibid . 141 . 89It is important to note , as Emma Craufurd points out , that the English word “ affliction ” is somewhat insufficient to express the French meaning of malheur . “ Our word unhappiness is a negative term and far too weak . Affliction is the nearest equivalent but not quite satisfactory . Malheur has in it a sense of inevitability and doom ” ( Emma Craufurd , WG 67 ) . 90GG 150 . 91Ibid . 80 . 92SWA 203 . 93WG 50 . 94SWA 203 . 95GG 65 . 96SWA 201 . 97Ibid . 54 . 98Ibid . 55 . 99WG 73 . 100SWA 203 . 101SNL 106 . 102WG 83 . 103Weil contends that the implicit love of God can have only three objects , or things , “ here below in which God is really though secretly present ” : love of religious ceremonies , the beauty of the world , and our neighbor , and also perhaps friendship , which Weil thinks distinct from love of neighbor ( Ibid. ) . 104Ibid . 101 . 105SWA 65 . 106GG 11 . Elsewhere , Weil writes , “ It was perhaps better not to be a martyr . The God from whom the martyrs drew joy in torture or death is close to him who was officially adopted by the Empire and afterward imposed by means of exterminations ” ( Ibid . 84 ) . 107WG 67 . 108Ibid . 68 . 109Consider Richard Kearney ’ s illuminating discussion of monsters in Strangers , Gods and Monsters ( New York : Routledge , 2003 ) . 110WG 67 . 111Ibid . 69 . 112Ibid . 113GG 123 . 114WG 70 . 115GG 81 . 116WG 72 . 117For more on the disturbing popularity of websites that post videos of real-life sadism and human suffering , and the subsequent trend of videotaping oneself watching such images and then posting those videos on the Internet , see Tracy Clark-Flory ’ s “ Let ’ s Watch a Murder , ” Salon , June 9 , 2012 ( www.salon.com/2012/06/10/lets_watch_a_murder/singleton/ ) . 118WG 73 . 119Ibid . 75 . 120Ibid . 90 . 121Ibid . 64 . 122Ibid . 138 . 123FLN 286 . 124SWA 77 . 125J . M. Perrin and G. Thibon , Simone Weil as We Knew Her , trans . Emma Craufurd ( London : Routledge , 2003 ) , 23 , 30 . 126Ibid . 114 . 127SL 13 . 128E . W. F. Tomlin , Simone Weil ( Cambridge : Bowes & Bowes , 1954 ) , 12–13 . 129SWA 77 . 130Ibid . 78 . 131Ibid . 76–7 , 78 . 132GG 14 . 133D . Z. Phillips in “ Editor ’ s Preface ” to Rush Rhees , Discussions of Simone Weil , ed . D. Z. Phillips ( Albany : State University of New York Press , 2000 ) , viii . 134Rhees , Discussions of Simone Weil , 110 . 135Phillips , “ Editor ’ s Preface , ” in Discussions of Simone Weil , ix . 136Rhees , Discussions of Simone Weil , 106 , 107 . 137Ibid . 107 . 138Ibid . 108 , 121 . 139Ibid . 110 . 140Ibid . 112 , 113 , 120 . 141Jean-Luc Marion ’ s account of “ the gift ” will be useful in clarifying why Weil ’ s notion of charity , in fact , requires detachment , not attachment . Jean-Luc Marion , Being Given : Toward a Phenomenology of Givenness , trans . Jeffrey L. Kosky , ( Stanford , CA : Stanford University Press , 2002 ) . 142GG 65–6 . 143Rhees , Discussions of Simone Weil , 106 . 144GG 19 . 145Anthony Steinbock , in his phenomenological study of hope , writes : “ I describe hope as directed principally toward the future , as engaged and sustainable , and as oriented to what is beyond myself . As such the experience of hope is essentially distinct from other experiences such as expectation , probability , wishing , longing , and denial , and is foundational for the experience of hopelessness ” ( “ Hoping against Hope , ” in Essays in Celebration of the Founding of the Organization of Phenomenological Organizations , ed . Cheung , Chan-Fai , Ivan Chvatik , Ion Copoeru , Lester Embree , Julia Iribarne , and Hans Rainer Sepp . Web-published at www.o-p-o.net , 2003 , 2 ) . Although he affirms hope as a phenomenon that is futurally oriented , as a kind of engagement , hope is distinct from imagining or wishing , for Steinbock . Yet the way in which Rhees uses the word “ hope ” —to hope that things will go one way for the beloved and not another means “ that I ought to hope he has not died and that he will not die ” —indicates an equivocation with a void ( future ) -filling imagination , in our view ( Rhees , Discussions of Simone Weil , 107 ) . 146Vance G. Morgan , Weaving the World ( Notre Dame , IN : University of Notre Dame Press , 2005 ) , 87 . 147SWA 202 . 148GG 18 . 149Rhees , Discussions of Simone Weil , 107 . 150Marion , Being Given , 86 . 151Matthew 25:37–9 . Weil herself writes : “ ‘ I was an hungered , and ye gave me meat. ’ When was that , Lord ? They did not know . We must not know when we do such acts ” ( GG 45 ) . 152Ibid . 153Ibid . 154Ibid . 46 . 155WG 91 . 156GG 68 . 157Ibid . 158Rhees , Discussions of Simone Weil , 108 . 159Ibid . 160GG 149 . 161Ibid . 23 . In this respect , see also Anne Carson ’ s discussion of Sappho ’ s poetry in “ What Does the Lover Want from Love ? ” in Eros : The Bittersweet , 62–3 . 162Emily Dickinson , Selected Poems , ed . Christopher Moore ( New York : Gramercy Books , 1993 ) , 26 . 163Rhees , Discussions of Simone Weil , 113 . 164Nel Noddings , “ Caring , ” in Justice and Care , ed . Virginia Held ( Boulder , CO : Westview Press , 1995 ) , 18 . 165Jane Addams , Democracy and Social Ethics ( Chicago : University of Illinois Press , 2002 ) , 6 . Emphasis added . 166Ibid . 167GG 64 . 168WG 114 . 169Matthew 19:24–6 . 170WG 119 . 171Ibid . 135–6 . 172Ibid . 142 . 173Ibid . 174Rhees , Discussions of Simone Weil , 110 . 175GG 14 . 176Ibid . 30 . 177Emmanuel Levinas , Totality and Infinity , trans . Alphonso Lingis ( Pittsburgh : Duquesne University Press , 2000 ) , 201 . 178Ibid . 73 . 179Ibid . 75 . 180Ibid . 78 . 181Ibid . 254 . 182GG 65 . 183WG 135 . 184Levinas , Totality and Infinity , 263 . 185Ibid . 266 . 186GG 67 . 187Ibid . 38 . 188Ibid . 189Ibid . 144 . 190Ibid . 95 . Chapter 5 1Rainer Maria Rilke , “ What Birds Dive through Is Not That Intimate Space , ” in The Poetry of Rilke , trans . Edward Snow ( New York : North Point , 2009 ) , 583 . 2GG 149 . 3Sushil Kumar Saxena , “ The Aesthetic Attitude , ” Philosophy East and West 28 ( 1 ) ( January 1978 ) , 81 . 4Ibid . 5GG 149 . 6WG 105 . 7Andrew McGhie , Pathology of Attention ( Middlesex , England : Penguin Books , 1969 ) , 28 . 8Michael and Abigail Lipson , “ Psychotherapy and the Ethics of Attention , ” Hastings Center Report , January–February 1996 , 18 . Weil may disagree with the moral equivalency of “ I have done well ” and “ I have done badly. ” In “ Reflections on the Right Use of School Studies with a View to the Love of God , ” she writes that one condition of putting studies to the right use is the attentive and slow contemplation of “ each school task in which we have failed , seeing how unpleasing and second rate it is , without seeking any excuse of overlooking any mistake or any of our tutor ’ s corrections , trying to get down to the origin of each fault ” ( WG 59–60 ) . The point would be to recognize one ’ s inherent mediocrity and thus humility , which would be entirely different from being conscious of one ’ s sinful nature , in that the latter may give us a sense of pride . 9NB 179 . 10Pascal , Pensées , 39 . 11GG 164 . 12FLN 146 . 13SNL 133 . 14Salomé Voegelin , Listening to Noise and Silence : Towards a Philosophy of Sound Art ( New York : Continuum , 2010 ) , 83 . 15GG 69–70 . 16Weil writes , “ When . . . a man turns away from God , he simply gives himself up to the law of gravity . Then he thinks that he can decide and choose , but he is only a thing , a stone that falls ” ( WG 75 ) . 17FLN 286 . 18SNL 149 . 19Ibid . 149–50 . 20LOP 184 . 21Ibid . 189 . 22Vetö , The Religious Metaphysics of Simone Weil , 90 . 23GG 43 . 24Ann Pirruccello , “ Interpreting Simone Weil : Presence and Absence in Attention , ” Philosophy East and West 45 ( 1 ) ( January 1995 ) , 67 . 25WG 105 . 26SNL 133 . 27WG 105 . 28Pirruccello , “ Interpreting Simone Weil , ” 67 . 29SNL 164 . 30T . S. Eliot , “ Religion and Literature , ” in Religion and Modern Literature : Essays in Theory and Criticism , ed. , G. B. Tennyson and Edward E. Ericson , Jr ( Grand Rapids , MI : Eerdmans , 1975 ) , 21 . 31GG 151 . 32Richard Kearney , The Wake of Imagination ( Minneapolis : University of Minnesota Press , 1988 ) , 8–9 . 33Ibid . 9 . 34Ibid . 12 . 35SNL 167 . 36Ibid . 37Ibid . 38Adorno , The Culture Industry , 49 . 39Ibid . 49–50 . Emphasis added . 40Actually , Adorno says that “ their primitivism is not that of the undeveloped , but that of the forcibly retarded ” ( Ibid . 47 ) . 41Ibid . 51 . 42Ibid . 52 . 43Ibid . 48 . 44Ibid . 45Ibid . 50 . 46Ibid . 49 . 47Ibid . 41 . 48Paula Varsano , translator , in the Preface to François Jullien , In Praise of Blandness ( New York : Zone Books , 2004 ) , 12 . 49GG 1 . 50Ibid . 130 . 51Ibid . 4 . 52LOP 184 . All five traits—duration , purity , infinity , no flattery , and universality—are listed in this text , pp . 184–5 . 53GG 149 . 54Ibid . 148 . 55Ibid . 149 . However , Michel Sourisse contends , “ In music . . . this distance is abolished . That is why it envelops us on all sides . Space limitations being lifted , we abandon ourselves to the bewitching power of sounds that subjugate us like a magical charm. ” Michel Sourisse , “ Simone Weil and Music , ” in The Beauty that Saves : Essays on Aesthetics and Language in Simone Weil , ed. , John M. Dunaway and Eric O. Springsted ( Macon , GA : Mercer University Press , 1996 ) , 123–4 . 56Ibid . 131–2 . 57Ibid . 131 . 58SWA 73 . 59Ibid . 55 . 60Ibid . 57 . 61SNL 165 . 62SWA 67 . 63Ibid . 69 . 64SNL 162 . 65SWA 55 . 66SNL 161 . 67Ibid . 162 . 68Ibid . 160 . 69WG 77 . 70Ibid . 126 . 71SWA 72 . 72Wang Shizhen , as cited by François Jullien , in In Praise of Blandness , 116 . 73Ibid . 44 . 74WG 77 . 75SWA 78 . 76Jullien , In Praise of Blandness , 45 . 77Ibid . 78Ibid . 79Ibid . 80Ibid . 66–7 . 81Ibid . 67 . 82Ibid . 83Ibid . 104 . 84Ibid . 70 . 85Ibid . 86GG 151 . 87Katherine T. Brueck , “ The Tragic Poetics of Simone Weil , ” in The Beauty That Saves : Essays on Aesthetics and Language in Simone Weil , ed. , John M. Dunaway and Eric O. Springsted ( Macon , GA : Mercer University Press , 1996 ) , 109 . For an insightful and extended discussion of Weil ’ s tragic , Christian conception of poetic beauty , see Katherine T. Brueck , The Redemption of Tragedy : The Literary Vision of Simone Weil ( Albany , NY : SUNY , 1995 ) . 88Murdoch , Metaphysics as a Guide to Morals , 90 . 89Ibid . 104 . 90SL 104 . 91Cornel West , Democracy Matters ( New York : Penguin Books , 2004 ) , 20 . For instance , West describes , “ For too many in white America the blues remains a kind of exotic source of amusement , a kind of primitivistic occasion for entertainment only . The blues is not simply a music to titillate ; it is a hard-fought way of life , and as such it should unsettle and unnerve whites about the legacy of white supremacy ” ( 20 ) . 92IC 18–23 . 93IC 20 . 94Sophocles , Antigone , 178 . 95IC 21 . 96Ibid . 23 . 97SWA 63 . 98William Robert , Trials : Of Antigone and Jesus ( New York : Fordham University Press , 2010 ) , 6 . 99Ibid . 100Jacques Derrida , Apories : Mourir—s ’ attendre aux “ limites de la vérité ” ( Paris : Galilée , 1996 ) , 25 ; trans . by Thomas Dutoit as Aporias : Dying—Awaiting ( One Another at ) the “ Limits of Truth ” ( Stanford : Stanford University Press , 1993 ) , 8 , as quoted in Robert , Trials : Of Antigone and Jesus , 6 . 101Sophocles , Antigone , 164 . 102Robert , Trials : Of Antigone and Jesus , 36 . 103Sophocles , Antigone , 164 . 104GG 122 . 105Ibid . 106Ibid . 148 . 107Diotima reminds us of this character of Beauty in Plato ’ s Symposium . When we are in the presence of the beautiful , we are impregnated with inspiration and give birth to more beauty . 108GG 151 . 109Ibid . 110In Martin Buber ’ s words , an “ ordered world ” is erected and “ does not give itself to you , ” while the “ world order ” can not be fabricated , it “ comes even when not called and vanishes even when you cling to it ” ( I and Thou , 83 ) . 111WG 107 . Emphasis added . 112Ibid . Moreover , Weil tells us , “ Luxury itself represents beauty for a whole class of men . It provides surroundings through which they can feel in a vague fashion that the universe is beautiful ” ( Ibid . 106 ) . 113Chris Hedges , War is a Force that Gives us Meaning ( New York : Anchor Books , 2003 ) , 6–7 . It is no accident that Hedges employs a term— “ void ” —so familiar to Weil , for he is deeply influenced by her thought and references her in his book . 114SNL 149 . 115Tom Gjelten , “ Karadzic Was Once Considered a Moderate by Many , ” NPR ( July 24 , 2008 ) ( www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php ? storyId=92878854 ) . 116WG 116–17 . 117Murdoch , Metaphysics as a Guide to Morals , 90 . 118SNL 165 . Chapter 6 1Simon Critchley , Infinitely Demanding : Ethics of Commitment , Politics of Resistance ( New York : Verso , 2008 ) , 38 . 2See for example , Thomas Rogers ’ “ Our Kids ’ Glorious New Age of Distraction , ” Salon , August 21 , 2011 ( www.salon.com/2011/08/21/now_you_see_it_interview/ ) . 3GG 4 . 4In employing the terms “ event ” and “ subjectivating , ” we are intentionally invoking the philosophy of Alain Badiou , whose ideas on grace , event , and love will help to systematize and clarify Weil ’ s notion of the double movement of grace . 5GG 4 . 6Ibid . 10 . 7Ibid . 10–11 . 8Ibid . 10 . 9Ibid . 11 . 10Badiou , Ethics , 41 . 11Vetö , The Religious Metaphysics of Simone Weil , 42 . 12GG 16 . 13Ibid . 33 . 14Ibid . 88 . 15Alain Badiou , Saint Paul : The Foundation of Universalism , trans . Ray Brassier ( Stanford , CA : Stanford University Press , 2003 ) , 91–2 . 16GG 18 . 17Badiou , Ethics , 47 . 18GG 3 . 19Ibid . 8 . 20Badiou , Saint Paul , 77 . 21GG 22 . 22Badiou , Ethics , 46 . 23WG 147 . 24GG 13 . Emphasis added . 25WG 93 . 26Ibid . 147 . 27GG 3 . 28WG 138 . 29GG 99 . 30Ibid . 31Ibid . 32Ibid . Emphasis added . 33Ibid . 99–100 . 34Ibid . 101 . 35Ibid . 36SNL 159 . 37Ibid . 38Ibid . 39Ibid . 151 . 40Ibid . 41Ibid . 157 . In this vein , Huxley writes , “ Probably all persons , even the most saintly , suffer to some extent from distractions . . . [ But ] some of the most profitable spiritual exercises actually make use of distractions , in such a way that these impediments to self-abandonment , mental silence and passivity in relation to God are transformed into means of progress. ” The “ lumps of sugar ” in Weil ’ s passage above may be analogous to the making “ use ” of distractions , here . Interestingly , Huxley argues , “ We must give up the attempt to fight distractions and find ways either of circumventing them , or of somehow making use of them , ” for ( alluding to Benet of Canfield in his Rule of Perfection ) “ the more a man operates , the more he is and exists . And the more he is and exists , the less of God is and exists within him ” ( Aldous Huxley , The Perennial Philosophy , [ New York : Harper Perennial , 2009 ] , 284 ) . 42SNL 157 . Weil also said , in a letter to Father Perrin : “ I may say that never at any moment in my life have I ‘ sought for God. ’ For this reason , which is probably too subjective , I do not like this expression and it strikes me as false . As soon as I reached adolescence , I saw the problem of God as a problem the data of which could not be obtained here below , and I decided that the only way of being sure not to reach a wrong solution , which seemed to me the greatest possible evil , was to leave it alone . So I left it alone ” ( WG 22 ) . 43GG 149 . 44FLN 141 . 45WG 93 . 46Ibid . 47GG 23 . 48Ibid . 24 . Matthew 6:2 . 49Ibid . 112 . 50Ibid . 112–13 . 51WG 100 . 52Ibid . 76 . 53Ibid . 54Ibid . 77 . 55Alain Badiou , “ Thinking the Event , ” in Philosophy in the Present ( Malden , MA : Polity , 2009 ) , 2 . 56Ibid . 5 . Emphasis added . 57Ibid . 4 . 58Ibid . 24 . 59Ibid . 23–4 . 60GG 44 . 61WG 75 . 62Ibid . 80 . 63GG 95 . 64Ibid . 46 . Emmanuel Gabellieri offers an elucidating discussion of the “ refusal of the gift ” in Chapter 8 , “ Décréation et Donation , ” of his book Être et Don : Simone Weil et la Philosophie ( Paris : Éditions Peeters , 2003 ) . 65GG 94 . 66Ibid . 130 . 67SWA 71 . 68Slavoj Žižek , “ Slavoj Žižek speaks at Occupy Wall Street : Transcript , ” The Parallax/Impose Magazine , October 25 , 2011 ( www.imposemagazine.com/bytes/slavoj-zizek-at-occupy-wall-street-transcript ) . 69GG 95 . 70Judith Butler , “ Judith Butler at Occupy Wall Street , ” Salon , October 24 , 2011 ( http : //www.salon.com/2011/10/24/judith_butler_at_occupy_wall_street/ ) . 71SWA 66 . 72GG 132 . Conclusion 1Paul J. Griffiths , Religious Reading ( New York : Oxford University Press , 1999 ) , ix . 2Don Ihde , Experimental Phenomenology : An Introduction ( Albany , NY : SUNY , 1986 ) , 31 . 3WG 61 . 4GG 42 . Emphasis added . 5WG 58 . 6GG 99 . Eric Springsted helpfully distinguishes three ways in which thoughts can be in opposition to each other for Weil : as paradox , as incommensuration , and as mystery . Paradox is the simple “ opposition between perceptions , thoughts , ideas or the predication of terms that we need to solve in order to contemplate their truth. ” What Weil means by “ contradiction ” is really a “ method of investigation ” that “ occurs whenever our intellect comes up against an unforeseen obstacle that forces us to recast our thoughts in order to accommodate it . In this sense , ” Springsted continues , “ ‘ contradiction ’ is the sort of thing we set in front of our students ’ minds in order to get them to think on their own by considering problems they have not previously seen. ” Eric O. Springsted , “ Contradiction , Mystery , and the Use of Words in Simone Weil , ” in The Beauty that Saves : Essays on Aesthetics and Language in Simone Weil , ed . John M. Dunaway and Eric O. Springsted ( Macon , GA : Mercer University Press , 1996 ) , 14–15 . 7Weil , “ A Few Reflections on the Notion of Value , ” 461–2 , 461 . 8GG 98 . 9Ibid . 180 , 181 . 10WG 59–60 . 11GG 40–1 . 12Anthony Steinbock , “ Interpersonal Attention Through Exemplarity , ” Journal of Consciousness Studies 8 ( 5–7 ) ( 2001 ) , 187 . 13GG 83 . Emphases added . 14Weil , “ A Few Reflections on the Notion of Value , ” 461 . 15WG 63 . 16GG 180 . 17WG 64 . 18NR 216 . Emphasis added . 19Ibid . 232 . 20Steinbock , “ Interpersonal Attention Through Exemplarity , ” 188 . 21Ibid . 190 . 22GG 60–1 . 23Eliot , “ Preface , ” viii . BIBLIOGRAPHY Accart , Xavier . Guénon ou le renversement des clartés : Influence d ’ un métaphysicien sur la vie littéraire et intellectuelle française ( 1920–1970 ) . Paris : Edidit – Milan : Archè , 2005 . Addams , Jane . Democracy and Social Ethics . Chicago : University of Illinois Press , 2002 . Adorno , Theodor . The Culture Industry . New York : Routledge , 2001 . Agamben , Giorgio . The Kingdom and the Glory : For a Theological Genealogy of Economy and Government , trans . Lorenzo Chiesa . Stanford , CA : Stanford University Press , 2011 . Anidjar , Gil . The Jew , the Arab : A History of the Enemy . Stanford , CA : Stanford University Press , 2003 . Aquinas , St. Thomas . Summa contra Gentiles , trans . A. C. Pegis et al . Notre Dame , IN : University of Notre Dame Press , 1975 . Arendt , Hannah . Eichmann in Jerusalem : A Report on the Banality of Evil . New York : Penguin , 1964 . — On Violence . New York : Harvest , 1970 . Aristotle . Nicomachean Ethics , 2nd edn , trans . Terence Irwin . Indianapolis , IN : Hackett , 1999 . Badiou , Alain . Ethics , trans . Peter Hallward . New York : Verso , 2001 . — Saint Paul : The Foundation of Universalism , trans . Ray Brassier . Stanford , CA : Stanford University Press , 2003 . — “ Language , Thought , Poetry. ” In Theoretical Writings , ed . and trans . Ray Brassier and Alberto Toscano . London and New York : Continuum , 2006 . Badiou , Alain and Slavoj Žižek . Philosophy in the Present , ed . Peter Engelmann , trans . Peter Thomas and Alberto Toscano . Cambridge : Polity , 2005 . Beinart , Peter . The Crisis of Zionism . New York : Times Books , 2012. bell hooks . “ Choosing the Margin as a Space of Radical Openness. ” In Women , Knowledge , and Reality : Explorations in Feminist Philosophy , 2nd edn , ed . Ann Garry and Marilyn Pearsall . New York : Routledge , 1997 . Bell , Richard H. Simone Weil : The Way of Justice as Compassion . New York : Rowan & Littlefield , 1998 . Blanchot , Maurice . The Infinite Conversation , trans . Susan Hanson . Minneapolis and London : University of Minnesota Press , 1993 . Bordo , Susan . Unbearable Weight . Berkeley : University of California Press , 1995 . Botterweck , G. Johannes and Helmer Ringgren . Theological Dictionary of the Old Testament , vol . V , trans . David E. Green . Grand Rapids , MI : WM . B. Eerdmans , 1986 . Brueck , Katherine T. The Redemption of Tragedy : The Literary Vision of Simone Weil . Albany , NY : SUNY , 1995 . — “ The Tragic Poetics of Simone Weil. ” In The Beauty That Saves : Essays on Aesthetics and Language in Simone Weil , ed . John M. Dunaway and Eric O. Springsted . Macon , GA : Mercer University Press , 1996 . Buber , Martin . I and Thou , trans . Walter Kaufmann . New York : Touchstone Books , 1996 . Butler , Judith . “ Is Judaism Zionism ? ” In The Power of Religion in the Public Sphere , ed . Eduardo Mendieta and Jonathan Vanantwerpen . New York : Columbia University Press , 2011 . — “ Judith Butler at Occupy Wall Street , ” Salon , October 24 , 2011. www.salon.com/2011/10/24/judith_butler_at_occupy_wall_street/ ( retrieved January 10 , 2012 ) . Camus , Albert . “ Letters to a German. ” In Resistance , Rebellion , and Death , trans . Justin O ’ Brien . New York : Vintage , 1974 . Carson , Anne . Eros : The Bittersweet . Champaign , IL : Dalkey Archive , 2000 . Clark-Flory , Tracy . “ Let ’ s Watch a Murder , ” Salon , June 9 , 2012. www.salon.com/2012/06/10/lets_watch_a_murder/singleton/ ( retrieved June 10 , 2012 ) . Coles , Robert , Simone Weil : A Modern Pilgrimage . Woodstock , VT : Skylight Paths , 2001 . Courtine-Denamy , Sylvie . Three Women in Dark Times : Edith Stein , Hannah Arendt , and Simone Weil , trans . G. M. Goshgarian . Ithaca , NY : Cornell University Press , 2000 . Critchley , Simon . Infinitely Demanding : Ethics of Commitment , Politics of Resistance . London : Verso , 2008 . — The Faith of the Faithless : Experiments in Political Theology . London : Verso , 2012 . Crockett , Clayton . Radical Political Theology : Religion and Politics After Liberalism . New York : Columbia University Press , 2011 . Dabashi , Hamid . “ Blindness and Insight : The Predicament of a Muslim Intellectual. ” In Iran : Between Tradition and Modernity , ed . Ramin Jahanbegloo . New York : Lexington Books , 2004 . Debord , Guy . Society of the Spectacle , trans . Donald Nicholson-Smith . New York : Zone Books , 1995 . Derrida , Jacques . Aporias : Dying – Awaiting ( One Another at ) the “ Limits of Truth , ” trans . Thomas Dutoit . Stanford : Stanford University Press , 1993 . Dickinson , Emily . Selected Poems , ed . Christopher Moore . New York : Gramercy Books , 1993 . Doering , E. Jane . Simone Weil and the Specter of Self-Perpetuating Force . Notre Dame , IN : University of Notre Dame Press , 2010 . Doering , E. Jane and Eric O. Springsted , eds . The Christian Platonism of Simone Weil . Notre Dame , IN : University of Notre Dame Press , 2004 . Eliot , T. S. “ Religion and Literature. ” In Religion and Modern Literature : Essays in Theory and Criticism , ed . G. B. Tennyson and Edward E. Ericson , Jr. Grand Rapids , MI : Eerdmans , 1975 . — “ Preface. ” In The Need for Roots , trans . Arthur Wills . London : Routledge , 2002 . Estelrich , Bartomeu . “ Simone Weil on Modern Disequilibrium. ” In The Relevance of the Radical : Simone Weil 100 Years Later , ed . A. Rebecca Rozelle-Stone and Lucian Stone . New York : Continuum , 2010 . Fiedler , Leslie . “ Introduction. ” In Simone Weil , Waiting for God , trans . Emma Craufurd . New York : HarperCollins , 2001 . Fiori , Gabriella . Simone Weil : An Intellectual Biography , trans . Joseph R. Berrigan . Athens , GA : University of Georgia Press , 1989 . Foucault , Michel . Discipline and Punish : The Birth of the Prison , 2nd edn , trans . Alan Sheridan . New York : Vintage , 1995 . Freud , Sigmund . The Freud Reader , ed . Peter Gay . New York : W.W. Norton & Company , 1989 . Gabellieri , Emmanuel . Être et Don : Simone Weil et la Philosophie . Paris : Éditions Peeters , 2003 . — “ Gravity and Grace as ‘ Trends ’ of the Being and the Soul , ” unpublished essay presented at the 32nd Annual Colloquy of the American Weil Society , University of Notre Dame , March 23 , 2012 . German , Eric . “ Sewing Discord : American Troops are in the Market for Patches that Mock the Muslim Faith , ” The Daily , March 18 , 2012. www.thedaily.com/page/2012/03/18/031812-news-infidel-gear-1–2/ ( retrieved June 10 , 2012 ) . Gjelten , Tom . “ Karadzic Was Once Considered a Moderate by Many , ” NPR , July 24 , 2008. www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php ? storyId=92878854 ( retrieved June 10 , 2012 ) . Griffiths , Paul J . Religious Reading . New York : Oxford University Press , 1999 . Grosz , Elizabeth . “ Sexed Bodies. ” In Continental Feminism Reader , ed . Ann Cahill and Jennifer Hansen . New York : Rowman and Littlefield , 2003 . Guignon , Charles . On Being Authentic . New York : Routledge , 2004 . Hadot , Pierre . Philosophy as a Way of Life , ed . Arnold I. Davidson . Oxford : Blackwell , 1995 . — What is Ancient Philosophy ? trans . Michael Chase . Cambridge , MA : Belknap Press of Harvard University Press , 2002 . Hedges , Chris . War is a Force that Gives us Meaning . New York : Anchor Books , 2003 . Heschel , Abraham Joshua . The Prophets . Peabody , MA : Hendrickson , 2009 . Huxley , Aldous . The Perennial Philosophy . New York : Harper Perennial , 2009 . Ihde , Don . Experimental Phenomenology : An Introduction . Albany , NY : SUNY , 1986 . Jullien , François . In Praise of Blandness , trans . Paula Varsano . New York : Zone Books , 2004 . Kearney , Richard . The Wake of Imagination . Minneapolis : University of Minnesota Press , 1988 . — Strangers , Gods and Monsters . New York : Routledge , 2003 . Kierkegaard , Søren . The Point of View for my Work as an Author : A Report to History and Related Writings , trans . Walter Lowrie . New York : Harper & Brothers , 1962 . Kittel , Gerhard , ed . Theological Dictionary of the New Testament , ed . and trans . Geoffrey W. Bromiley . Grand Rapids , MI : WM . B. Eerdmans Publishing , 1964 . Levinas , Emmanuel . “ Simone Weil against the Bible. ” In Difficult Freedom : Essays on Judaism , trans . Seán Hand . Baltimore , MD : Johns Hopkins University Press , 1990 . — Totality and Infinity , trans . Alphonso Lingis . Pittsburgh , PA : Duquesne University Press , 2000 . Lipson , Michael and Abigail Lipson . “ Psychotherapy and the Ethics of Attention , ” Hastings Center Report ( January–February 1996 ) . McGhie , Andrew . Pathology of Attention . Middlesex , England : Penguin Books , 1969 . McGinn , Bernard . The Foundations of Mysticism : Origins to the Fifth Century , vol . 2 of The Presence of God . New York : Crossroad , 2005 . McIntosh , Peggy . “ White Privilege , Male Privilege. ” In Applied Ethics : A Multicultural Approach , 4th edn , ed . Larry May , Shari Collins-Chobanian , and Kai Wong . Alexandria , VA : Prentice Hall , 2005 . Marion , Jean-Luc . Being Given : Toward a Phenomenology of Givenness , trans . Jeffrey L. Kosky . Stanford , CA : Stanford University Press , 2002 . Mendieta , Eduardo and Jonathan Vanantwerpen , eds . The Power of Religion in the Public Sphere . New York : Columbia University Press , 2011 . Morgan , Vance G. Weaving the World . Notre Dame , IN : University of Notre Dame Press , 2005 . Murdoch , Iris . Metaphysics as a Guide to Morals . New York : Penguin Books , 1992 . Nevin , Thomas R. Simone Weil : Portrait of a Self-exiled Jew . Chapel Hill : University of North Carolina Press , 1991 . Noddings , Nel . “ Caring. ” In Justice and Care , ed . Virginia Held . Boulder , CO : Westview , 1995 . Pappe , Ilan . The Ethnic Cleansing of Palestine . Oxford : Oneworld , 2006 . Pascal , Blaise . Pensées , trans . A. J. Krailsheimer . London : Penguin Books , 1995 . Peake , Susan , Lenore Manderson , and Helen Potts . “ ‘ Part and Parcel of Being a Woman ’ : Female Urinary Incontinence and Constructions of Control , ” Medical Anthropology Quarterly 13 ( 3 ) ( September 1999 ) . Perrin , J. M. and G. Thibon . Simone Weil as We Knew Her , trans . Emma Craufurd . London : Routledge , 2003 . Pétrement , Simone . Simone Weil : A Life , trans . Raymond Rosenthal . New York : Pantheon Books , 1976 . Phillips , D. Z . “ Editor ’ s Preface. ” In Rush Rhees , Discussions of Simone Weil , ed . D. Z. Phillips . Albany : State University of New York Press , 2000 . Pirruccello , Ann . “ Interpreting Simone Weil : Presence and Absence in Attention , ” Philosophy East and West 45 ( 1 ) ( January 1995 ) . Piterberg , Gabriel . The Returns of Zionism : Myths , Politics and Scholarship in Israel . London : Verso , 2008 . Plato . The Complete Works of Plato , ed . John M. Cooper . Indianapolis , IN : Hackett , 1997 . Postman , Neil . Amusing Ourselves to Death : Public Discourse in the Age of Show Business . New York : , Penguin , 1985 . Rhees , Rush . Discussions of Simone Weil , ed . D. Z. Phillips . Albany , NY : SUNY , 2000 . Rilke , Rainer Maria . The Notebooks of Malte Laurids Brigge , trans . Stephen Mitchell . New York : Vintage International , 1990 . — Rilke on Love and Other Difficulties , trans . with commentary by John J. L. Mood . New York : W.W. Norton & Company , 2004 . Robert , William . Trials : Of Antigone and Jesus . New York : Fordham University Press , 2010 . Rogers , Thomas . “ Our Kids ’ Glorious New Age of Distraction , ” Salon , August 21 , 2011. www.salon.com/2011/08/21/now_you_see_it_interview/ ( retrieved June 10 , 2012 ) . Rozelle-Stone , A. Rebecca and Lucian Stone . “ The ‘ War ’ on Error ? Violent Metaphor and Words with Capital Letters. ” In The Relevance of the Radical : Simone Weil 100 Years Later , ed . A. Rebecca Rozelle-Stone and Lucian Stone . New York : Continuum , 2010 . Ruddick , Sara . Maternal Thinking : Toward a Politics of Peace . Boston : Beacon , 1995 . — “ Injustice in Families : Assault and Domination. ” In Justice and Care : Essential Readings in Feminist Ethics , ed . Virginia Held . Boulder , CO : Westview , 1995 . Sand , Shlomo . The Invention of the Jewish People . London : Verso , 2009 . Sandage , Steven J. , T. W. Wiens , and C. M. Dahl . “ Humility and Attention : The Contemplative Psychology of Simone Weil , ” Journal of Psychology and Christianity 20 ( 4 ) ( 2001 ) . Sappho . The Poems , trans . Sasha Newborn . Santa Barbara , CA : Bandana Books , 2000 . Saxena , Sushil Kumar . “ The Aesthetic Attitude , ” Philosophy East and West 28 ( 1 ) ( January 1978 ) . Schmidt , Lawrence E. “ Simone Weil ’ s Understanding of Judaism Considered in the Context of Eric Voegelin ’ s Israel and Revelation , A Reflection Inspired by Palle Yourgrau , ” unpublished essay presented at the 32nd Annual Colloquy of the American Weil Society , University of Notre Dame , March 22–25 , 2012 . Scholem , Gershom . On the Kabbalah and Its Symbolism , trans . Ralph Manheim . New York : Schocken Books , 1996 . Schuon , Frithjof . The Transcendent Unity of Religions , with an Introduction by Huston Smith . Wheaton , IL : Quest , 1993 . Singer , Irving . The Nature of Love 1 : Plato to Luther . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press , 2009 . Smith , Huston . The World ’ s Religions . New York : HarperCollins , 1991 . Sophocles . Antigone , in Sophocles I : Oedipus the King , Oedipus at Colonus , Antigone , 2nd edn , trans . David Grene . Chicago : University of Chicago Press , 1991 . Sourisse , Michel . “ Simone Weil and Music. ” In The Beauty that Saves : Essays on Aesthetics and Language in Simone Weil , ed . John M. Dunaway and Eric O. Springsted . Macon , GA : Mercer University Press , 1996 . Springsted , Eric O . “ The Baptism of Simone Weil. ” In Diogenes Allen and Eric . O. Springsted , Spirit , Nature , and Community : Issues in the Thought of Simone Weil . Albany : State University of New York Press , 1994 . — “ Contradiction , Mystery , and the Use of Words in Simone Weil. ” In The Beauty that Saves : Essays on Aesthetics and Language in Simone Weil , ed . John M. Dunaway and Eric O. Springsted . Macon , GA : Mercer University Press , 1996 . Steinbock , Anthony . “ Interpersonal Attention Through Exemplarity , ” Journal of Consciousness Studies 8 ( 5–7 ) ( 2001 ) . — “ Hoping against Hope. ” In Essays in Celebration of the Founding of the Organization of Phenomenological Organizations , ed . Cheung , Chan-Fai , Ivan Chvatik , Ion Copoeru , Lester Embree , Julia Iribarne , and Hans Rainer Sepp . Web-published at www.o-p-o.net , 2003 ( retrieved June 10 , 2012 ) . — Phenomenology & Mysticism : The Verticality of Religious Experience . Bloomington : Indiana University Press , 2007 . Tomlin , E. W. F. Simone Weil . Cambridge : Bowes & Bowes , 1954 . Tracy , David . “ Simone Weil : The Impossible. ” In The Christian Platonism of Simone Weil , ed . E. Jane Doering and Eric O. Springsted . Notre Dame , IN : University of Notre Dame Press , 2004 . Varsano , Paula . “ Preface. ” In François Jullien , In Praise of Blandness . New York : Zone Books , 2004 . Vetö , Miklos . The Religious Metaphysics of Simone Weil , trans . Joan Dargan . Albany , NY : SUNY , 1994 . Voegelin , Salomé . Listening to Noise and Silence : Towards a Philosophy of Sound Art . New York : Continuum , 2010 . Weil , Simone . Seventy Letters , trans . Richard Rees . New York : Oxford University Press , 1965 . — On Science , Necessity , and the Love of God , trans . Richard Rees . London : Oxford University Press , 1968 . — First and Last Notebooks , trans . Richard Rees . London : Oxford University Press , 1970 . — Oppression and Liberty , trans . Arthur Wills and John Petrie . Amherst : University of Massachusetts Press , 1973 . — Simone Weil Reader , ed . George A. Panichas . Wakefield , RI and London : Moyer Bell , 1977 . — Lectures on Philosophy , trans . Hugh Price . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 1978 . — Simone Weil : An Anthology , ed . Siân Miles . New York : Weidenfeld and Nicolson , 1986 . — Formative Writings 1929–1941 , trans . Dorothy Tuck McFarland and Wilhelmina van Ness . Amherst : University of Massachusetts Press , 1987 . — Intimations of Christianity among the Ancient Greeks , trans . E. C. Geissbuhler . London : Routledge , 1988 . — Waiting for God , trans . Emma Craufurd . New York : HarperCollins , 2001 . — Gravity and Grace , trans . Emma Crawford and Mario von der Ruhr . London : Routledge , 2002 . — Letter to a Priest , trans . Arthur Wills . London : Routledge , 2002 . — The Need for Roots , trans . Arthur Wills . London : Routledge , 2002 . — Simone Weil on Colonialism , ed . and trans . J. P. Little . New York : Rowman and Littlefield , 2003 . — The Notebooks of Simone Weil , trans . Arthur Wills . London : Routledge & Kegan Paul , 2004 . — “ A Few Reflections on the Notion of Value , ” trans . E. Jane Doering , in Cahiers Simone Weil XXXIV ( 4 ) ( December 2011 ) . Weil , Sylvie . At Home with André and Simone Weil , trans . Benjamin Ivry . Evanston , IL : Northwestern University Press , 2010 . West , Cornel . Democracy Matters . New York : Penguin Books , 2004 . Wright , Robin . “ An Iranian Luther Shakes the Foundations of Islam , ” The Guardian , February 1 , 1995 . Reprinted and retrieved from : www.drsoroush.com/English/News_Archive/E-NWS-19950201–1.html ( retrieved June 10 , 2012 ) . Yourgrau , Palle . Simone Weil . London : Reaktion Books , 2011 . Žižek , Slavoj . “ Slavoj Žižek speaks at Occupy Wall Street : Transcript , ” The Parallax/Impose Magazine , October 25 , 2011. www.imposemagazine.com/bytes/slavoj-zizek-at-occupy-wall-street-transcript ( retrieved January 10 , 2012 ) . INDEX absolute , the 15 , 18 , 92 absolute Evil 19 absolute Good 19 absolutism 6 Addams , Jane 127 Adorno , Theodor 143 , 144 , 145 , 147 , 151 , 154 “ On the Fetish Character in Music and the Regression of Listening ” 143 akrasia 95 , 101 see also grace ; love ; platonic lover anathema sit 21–7 , 29 , 42 , 58 , 65 Anidjar , Gil 55 The Jew , the Arab : A History of the Enemy 55 anonymity 141–5 anti-identitarianism 25 see also non identitarianism anti-Semitism 64 Arendt , Hannah 26 , 27 , 64 Aristophanes 72 , 73 Aristotle 95 asceticism 93 assimilationism 49 atheism , as purification 27–30 see also God , existence of atheology 5 , 6 , 68 see also reflective-negative theology Bach , Johann Sebastian 152 Badiou , Alain 1 , 3 , 4 , 167 , 168 , 169 , 170 , 178 , 179 Bartky , Sandra Lee 94 Bhagavad Gita , the 62 Bible , the 52 New Testament , the 35 , 56 , 62 Old Testament , the 53 , 54 , 56 , 62 Blanchot , Maurice 4 , 5 blandness 150–1 Bordo , Susan 95 , 96 Bousquet , Joë 74 , 80 Brenner , Rachel 52 Brueck , Katherine 153 Buddha 45 Buddhism 49 Bullough , Edward 134 Butler , Judith 64 , 65 , 66 capitalism 12 , 16 , 28 , 52 , 59 , 84 care ethics 122 Carson , Anne 73 , 97 , 98 choice , of obedience to God 177–81 see also grace Christianity 15 , 23 , 26 , 28 , 29 , 31 , 39 , 44 Christology ( Weil ’ s ) 37–42 Church history 17 Church , as a social construct 23–4 Coles , Robert 52 collective , the 18–21 communism 26 corruption 21–2 see also power Couturier , Marie-Alain 35 , 42 , 48 , 49 , 50 , 54 , 57 , 58 , 60 creation 67–70 see also decreation Critchley , Simon 164 , 178 Crucifixion , the 14 , 39 , 40 , 59 , 112 , 168 Crusades , the 23 , 24 Cathar Crusade ( 1209–29 ) 24 Da Vinci , Leonardo 152 Dadaism 142 Dante 88 decreation 68 , 80–5 see also creation Deitz , Simone 30 democracy 26 , 84 Derrida , Jacques 157 Descartes , René 27 , 95 Dickinson , Emily 126 “ I Had Been Hungry ” 126 Dionysus 45 Diotima of Mantinea 73 divine mania 112 Doering , E. Jane 24 , 57 dogmatism 6 , 29 domination ( injustice ) 107 see also neglect dualism 19 education , paradox in , the 187–93 Eliot , T. S. 141 , 193 Enlightenment , the 59 , 141 evil 18 , 74–80 see also gravity excommunication , the formula for 24 logic of , the 25 expressionism 141 Fiedler , Leslie 7 , 10 Foucault , Michel 95 Discipline and Punish 95 Freud , Anna 52 Freud , Sigmund 71 , 72 , 74 Civilization and Its Discontents 72 gift , Jean-Luc Marion on 124–5 God , existence of , the 29–30 see also atheism Gospel , of Mathew 22 , 56 , 177 grace , decreation ( the first movement ) 165–8 the impossible and the subjects of 182–5 recreation ( the second movement ) 168–71 see also akrasia ; choice ; love ; platonic lover gravity ( la pesanteur ) 75 , 80 , 84 see also evil Grosz , Elizabeth 96 Habermas , Jürgen 64 Hedges , Chris 160 War is a Force that Gives Us Meaning 160 Herbert , George 33 , 34 “ Love ” 33 Hinduism 49 Hitler , Adolf 25 Hitlerism 12 , 24 , 25 , 26 Holocaust , the 64 human nature 70–4 see also void identity , as ego-centered 25 see also patriotism Ihde , Don 187 , 188 Iliad 62 impersonality , sub-traits of 146 incarnationism 50 Inquisition , the 23 , 24 Irigaray , Luce 131 Jullien , François 145 , 150 , 151 Kant , Immanuel 140 Karadzic , Radovan 160 Kazin , Alfred 52 Kearney , Richard 141 , 142 Kierkegaard , Søren 20 Krishna 45 , 50 , 57 Levinas , Emmanuel 52 , 55 , 57 , 61 , 62 , 63 , 65 , 122 , 129 , 130 , 131 Totality and Infinity 129 Lipson , Abigail 135 Lipson , Michael 135 love , attention ( justice ) 102–12 and affliction ( malheur ) 112–20 critiques of Weil ’ s perspective on love 122–32 beyond the intellect 87–90 losing control and 94–101 Platonic eros 90–4 see also akrasia ; grace ; platonic lover Mallarmé , Stéphane 3 Marion , Jean-Luc 28 , 124 , 125 “ phenomenology of givenness ” 124 Maritain , Jacques 35 McGhie , Andrew 135 McIntosh , Peggy 107 , 108 Mehlman , Jeffrey 52 monasticism 30 Morgan , Vance 123 Murdoch , Iris 73 , 76 , 153 , 161 mysticism 30–4 Nazism 59 , 60 , 64 necessity , aspects of 140 negative theology 29 neglect ( uncaring ) 107 see also domination Nevin , Thomas 51 Noddings , Nel 122 , 127 nonidentitarianism 25 see also anti-identitariansim Osiris 45 , 50 Pascal , Blaise 75 , 77 , 88 , 136 Pensées 75 patriotism 25 see also identity Perrin , Joseph-Marie 120 perversions 159–61 Pétrement , Simone 60 , 61 Phillips , D. Z . 121 philosophical commitment 179 philosophy 34 Pirruccello , Ann 140 , 141 Plato 14 , 19 , 20 , 30 , 34 , 38 , 41 , 72 , 78 , 82 , 87 , 89 , 91 , 92 , 99 , 129 , 138 , 159 , 161 , 179 , 188 , 190 Phaedrus 90 , 91 , 92 , 93 , 102 , 112 , 157 Republic 20 , 99 , 179 Symposium 72 , 90 , 91 , 92 Platonic lover 89 see also akrasia ; grace ; love Platonism 28 , 89 political-theology 21–7 Church as a prototype of 24 power 22 see also corruption privilege 107 Peggy McIntosh on 107–8 purity 158 Qu ’ ran , the 62 Rabi , Witold 52 reflective-negative theology 5 see also atheology religious pluralism 42–51 see also Weil , Simone , her treatment of Judaism and Islam Rhees , Rush 121 , 122 , 123 , 124 , 126 , 129 , 131 Rilke , Rainer Maria 2 , 3 , 6 , 99 Notebooks of Malte Laurids Brigge , The 2 Robert , William 156 , 157 Ruddick , Sara 106 , 107 , 110 , 111 “ Injustice in Families : Assault and Domination ” 106 St Augustine 56 , 88 , 95 St Francis 33 St John 58 , 166 St Thomas Aquinas 56 Summa contra Gentiles 56 Schmidt , Lawrence 51 Scholem , Gershom 9–10 , 12 , 13 , 64 Singer , Irving 87 , 91 Smith , Huston 104 Socrates 61 , 90 , 91 , 92 , 102 , 112 , 178 , 190 Sophocles 154 Antigone 62 , 154–6 , 157 , 158 Sourisse , Michel 146 Steinbock , Anthony 28 , 31 , 32 , 191 Steiner , George 52 surrealism 142 Tao , the 45 Taoism 49 , 50 Taylor , Charles 64 terrorism 26 Thibon , Gustave 51 , 120 La pésanteur et la grâce 51 , 52 Tomlin , E. W. F. 121 totalitarianism 17 , 24 , 26 , 52 , 59 see also anathema sit tragedy 152–8 see also Antigone Upanishads 49 , 50 Van Gogh , Vincent 142 Vetö , Miklos 80 , 139 , 167 Voegelin , Salomé 137 void , the ( le vide ) 70 see also human nature Voltaire 62 Warhol , Andy 142 Weil , Simone , Attente de Dieu ( Waiting for God ) 7 , 10 , 51 baptism of , the 30 her letter to Father Couturier 35–7 , 37 , 42 , 44 her treatment of Judaism and Islam 51–66 Notebooks 68–9 , 69 , 83 , 98 three mystical experiences of , the 33–4 West , Cornel 64 , 154 World War I 11 World War II 26 , 51 Zionism 64 , 65 Žižek , Slavoj 163 , 178 , 183 Contents Cover Half Title Title Page Copyright Page Table of Contents Preface Translator ’ s Foreword Part I The Needs of the Soul Order Liberty Obedience Responsibility Equality Hierarchism Honour Punishment Freedom of Opinion Security Risk Private Property Collective Property Truth Part II Uprootedness Uprootedness in the Towns Uprootedness in the Countryside Uprootedness and Nationhood Part III The Growing of Roots Page List i ii iii iv v vi vii viii ix x xi xii xiii xiv xv xvi 1 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 41 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 100 101 102 103 104 105 106 107 108 109 110 111 112 113 114 115 116 117 118 119 120 121 122 123 124 125 126 127 128 129 130 131 132 133 134 135 136 137 138 139 140 141 142 143 144 145 146 147 148 149 150 151 152 153 154 155 156 157 158 159 160 161 162 163 164 165 166 167 168 169 170 171 172 173 174 175 176 177 178 179 180 181 182 183 185 186 187 188 189 190 191 192 193 194 195 196 197 198 199 200 201 202 203 204 205 206 207 208 209 210 211 212 213 214 215 216 217 218 219 220 221 222 223 224 225 226 227 228 229 230 231 232 233 234 235 236 237 238 239 240 241 242 243 244 245 246 247 248 249 250 251 252 253 254 255 256 257 258 259 260 261 262 263 264 265 266 267 268 269 270 271 272 273 274 275 276 277 278 279 280 281 282 283 284 285 286 287 288 289 290 291 292 293 294 295 296 297 298 299 300 301 The Need for Roots ‘ Its subject is politics in the widest Aristotelian understanding of the term , and the treatment is of exceptional originality and breadth of human sympathy . What is required if men and women are to feel at home in society and are to recover their full vitality ? Into wrestling with that question , Simone Weil put the very substance of her mind and temperament . The apparently solid edifices of our prepossessions fall down before her onslaught like ninepins. ’ The Times Literary Supplement Routledge Classics includes Theodore Adorno Martin Buber Jonathan Culler Jacques Derrida Émile Durkheim Terry Eagleton Albert Einstein Marc Ferro Michel Foucault Sigmund Freud Erich Fromm F.A . Hayek Christopher Hill Fredric Jameson Carl Gustav Jung Carl Kerényi Frank Kermode Jacques Lacan Georges Lefebvre Claude Lévi-Strauss Konrad Lorenz Alasdair MacIntyre Marshall McLuhan Bronislaw Malinowski Marcel Mauss Maurice Merleau-Ponty Mary Midgley Iris Murdoch Eric Partridge Jean Piaget Karl Popper Kathleen Raine I.A . Richards W.H.R . Rivers Jean-Paul Sartre Roger Scruton Adrian Stokes D.T . Suzuki A.J.P . Taylor Max Weber Simone Weil G. Wilson Knight Ludwig Wittgenstein Frances Yates For a complete list of titles visit www.routledgeclassics.com SimoneWeil The Need for Roots Prelude to a Declaration of Duties towards Mankind Translated by Arthur Wills With a preface by T. S. Eliot L ’ Enracinement was first published 1949 by Editions Gallimard , Paris First published in English 1952 by Routledge & Kegan Paul First published in Routledge Classics 2002 by Routledge 2 Park Square , Milton Park , Abingdon , Oxon OX14 4RN 711 Third Avenue , New York , NY 10017 Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group , an Informa business Translation © 1952 Editions Gallimard Typeset in Joanna by RefineCatch Limited , Bungay , Suffolk All rights reserved . No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic , mechanical , or other means , now known or hereafter invented , including photocopying and recording , or in any information storage or retrieval system , without permission in writing from the publishers . British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library Library of Congress Cataloguing in Publication Data Weil , Simone , 1909–1943 . [ Enracinement , English . ] The need for roots : prelude to a declaration of duties towards mankind / Simone Weil ; preface by T.S . Eliot . p. cm . – ( Routledge classics ) Includes bibliographical references . 1 . Social ethics . 2 . Social psychology . I . Title . II . Series . HM665.W4513 2001 303.3 ’ 72–dc21 2001041850 ISBN 978–0–415–27101–1 ( hbk ) ISBN 978–0–415–27102–8 ( pbk ) CONTENTS PREFACE BY T. S. ELIOT TRANSLATOR ’ S FOREWORD PART I The Needs of the Soul Order Liberty Obedience Responsibility Equality Hierarchism Honour Punishment Freedom of Opinion Security Risk Private Property Collective Property Truth PART II Uprootedness Uprootedness in the Towns Uprootedness in the Countryside Uprootedness and Nationhood PART III The Growing of Roots PREFACE The only kind of introduction which could merit permanent association with a book by Simone Weil would be—like that provided by M. Gustave Thibon to Gravity and Grace1—an introduction by someone who knew her . The reader of her work finds himself confronted by a difficult , violent and complex personality ; and the assistance of those who had the advantage of long discussions or correspondence with her , especially those who knew her under the peculiar conditions of the last five years of her life , will be of permanent value in the future . I lack these qualifications . My aims in writing this preface are , first , to affirm my belief in the importance of the author and of this particular book ; second , to warn the reader against premature judgment and summary classification—to persuade him to hold in check his own prejudices and at the same time to be patient with those of Simone Weil . Once her work is known and accepted , such a preface as this should become superfluous . All of Simone Weil ’ s work is posthumous . Gravity and Grace—the selection from her voluminous notebooks made by M. Thibon , and the first volume to appear in France—is admirable in its contents , but somewhat deceptive in its form . The comparison with Pascal ( a writer of whom Simone Weil sometimes spoke with asperity ) may be pressed too far . The fragmentariness of the extracts elicits the profound insights and the startling originality , but suggests that hers was a mind of occasional flashes of inspiration . After reading Waiting on God2 and the present volume I saw that I must try to understand the personality of the author ; and that the reading and re-reading of all of her work was necessary for this slow process of understanding . In trying to understand her , we must not be distracted—as is only too likely to happen on a first reading—by considering how far , and at what points , we agree or disagree . We must simply expose ourselves to the personality of a woman of genius , of a kind of genius akin to that of the saints . Perhaps ‘ genius ’ is not the right word . The only priest with whom she ever discussed her belief and her doubts has said : je crois que son âme est incomparablement plus haute que son génie . That is another way of indicating that our first experience of Simone Weil should not be expressible in terms of approval or dissent . I can not conceive of anybody ’ s agreeing with all of her views , or of not disagreeing violently with some of them . But agreement and rejection are secondary : what matters is to make contact with a great soul . Simone Weil was one who might have become a saint . Like some who have achieved this state , she had greater obstacles to overcome , as well as greater strength for overcoming them , than the rest of us . A potential saint can be a very difficult person : I suspect that Simone Weil could be at times insupportable . One is struck , here and there , by a contrast between an almost superhuman humility and what appears to be an almost outrageous arrogance . There is a significant sentence by the French priest whom I have already quoted . He reports that he does not remember ‘ ever having heard Simone Weil , in spite of her virtuous desire for objectivity , give way in the course of a discussion ’ . This comment throws light on much of her published work . I do not believe that she was ever animated by delight in her own forensic skill—a self-indulgence to which I suspect Pascal came dangerously near , in the Letters—the display of power in overcoming others in controversy . It was rather that all her thought was so intensely lived , that the abandonment of any opinion required modifications in her whole being : a process which could not take place painlessly , or in the course of a conversation . And—especially in the young , and in those like Simone Weil in whom one detects no sense of humour—egotism and selflessness can resemble each other so closely that we may mistake the one for the other . The statement that Simone Weil ’ s ‘ soul was incomparably superior to her genius ’ will , however , be misunderstood if it gives the impression of depreciating her intellect . Certainly she could be unfair and intemperate ; certainly she committed some astonishing aberrations and exaggerations . But those immoderate affirmations which tax the patience of the reader spring not from any flaw in her intellect but from excess of temperament . She came of a family with no lack of intellectual endowment—her brother is a distinguished mathematician ; and as for her own mind , it was worthy of the soul which employed it . But the intellect , especially when bent upon such problems as those which harassed Simone Weil , can come to maturity only slowly ; and we must not forget that Simone Weil died at the age of thirty-three . I think that in The Need for Roots especially , the maturity of her social and political thought is very remarkable . But she had a very great soul to grow up to ; and we should not criticise her philosophy at thirty-three as if it were that of a person twenty or thirty years older . In the work of such a writer we must expect to encounter paradox . Simone Weil was three things in the highest degree : French , Jewish and Christian . She was a patriot who would gladly have been sent back to France to suffer and die for her compatriots : she had to die—partly , it would seem , as the result of self-mortification , in refusing to take more food than the official rations of ordinary people in France—in 1943 in a sanatorium at Ashford , Kent . She was also a patriot who saw clearly , as this book shows , the faults and the spiritual weakness of contemporary France . She was a Christian with an intense devotion to Our Lord in the Sacrament of the Altar , yet she refused baptism , and much of her writing constitutes a formidable criticism of the Church . She was intensely Jewish , suffering torments in the affliction of the Jews in Germany ; yet she castigated Israel3 with all the severity of a Hebrew Prophet . Prophets , we are told , were stoned in Jerusalem : but Simone Weil is exposed to lapidation from several quarters . And in her political thinking she appears as a stern critic of both Right and Left ; at the same time more truly a lover of order and hierarchy than most of those who call themselves Conservative , and more truly a lover of the people than most of those who call themselves Socialist . As for her attitude towards the Church of Rome and her attitude towards Israel I wish , in the space of a preface , to make only one observation . The two attitudes are not only compatible but coherent , and should be considered as one . It was in fact her rejection of Israel that made her a very heterodox Christian . In her repudiation of all but a few parts of the Old Testament ( and in what she accepted she discerned traces of Chaldaean or Egyptian influence ) she falls into something very like the Marcionite heresy . In denying the divine mission of Israel she is also rejecting the foundation of the Christian Church . Hence the difficulties that caused her so much agony of spirit . I must affirm that there is no trace of the Protestant in her composition : for her , the Christian Church could only be the Church of Rome . In the Church there is much to which she is blind , or about which she is strangely silent : she seems to give no thought to the Blessed Virgin ; and as for the Saints , she is concerned only with those who attract her interest through their writings—such as St. Thomas Aquinas ( whom she dislikes , perhaps on insufficient acquaintance ) and St. John of the Cross ( whom she admires because of his profound knowledge of spiritual method ) . In one respect she has , at first sight , something in common with those intellectuals of the present day ( mostly with a vague liberal Protestant background ) who can find their way towards the religious life only through the mysticism of the East . Her enthusiasm for everything Greek ( including the mysteries ) was unbounded . For her , there was no revelation to Israel , but a good deal of revelation to the Chaldaeans , the Egyptians and the Hindus . Her attitude may appear to be dangerously close to that of those universalists who maintain that the ultimate and esoteric truth is one , that all religions show some traces of it , and that it is a matter of indifference to which one of the great religions we adhere . Yet she is saved from this error—and this is a matter for admiration and thankfulness—by her devotion to the person of Our Lord . In her criticism of the Jewish and the Christian faiths , I think that we have to try to make for ourselves a threefold distinction , asking ourselves : how much is just ? how much is serious objection that must be rebutted ? and how much , in the way of error , can be extenuated on the ground of the immaturity of a superior and passionate personality ? Our analyses may differ widely : but we must ask and answer these questions for ourselves . I do not know how good a Greek scholar she was . I do not know how well read she was in the history of the civilisations of the Eastern Mediterranean . I do not know whether she could read the Upanishads in Sanskrit ; or , if so , how great was her mastery of what is not only a very highly developed language but a way of thought the difficulties of which only become more formidable to a European student the more diligently he applies himself to it . But I do not think that she shows , in this field , the mind of an historian . In her adulation of Greece , and of the ‘ wisdom of the East ’ , as in her disparagement of Rome and Israel , she seems to me almost wilful . In one quarter she sees only what she can admire ; in another , she repudiates without discrimination . Because she dislikes the Roman Empire , she dislikes Virgil . Her admirations , when not motivated by her dislikes , seem to be at least intensified by them . One may sympathise with her horror at the brutalities of expanding or imperialistic peoples ( as the Romans in Europe and the Spanish in America ) in crushing local civilisations . But when , in order to enhance her denunciation of the Romans , she attempts to make out a case for the culture of the Druids , we do not feel that our meagre knowledge of that vanished society gives any ground for her conjectures . We can share her revulsion from the atrocities committed in the suppression of the Albigensian heresy , and yet speculate whether the peculiar civilisation of Provence had not come to the end of its productivity . Would the world be a better place today if there were half a dozen different cultures flourishing between the English Channel and the Mediterranean , instead of the one which we know as France ? Simone Weil begins with an insight ; but the logic of her emotions can lead her to make generalisations so large as to be meaningless . We may protest that we are so completely in the dark as to what the world would be like now if events had taken a different course , that such a question as that whether the latinisation of Western Europe by Roman conquest was a good or bad thing is unanswerable . Her flights of fancy of this kind must not , however , be taken as invalidating her fundamental concept of rootedness , and her warnings against the evils of an over-centralised society . This book was written during the last year or so of Simone Weil ’ s life , during her employment at French Headquarters in London ; and it issues , I understand , from memoranda which she submitted in connexion with the policy to be pursued after the Liberation . The problems of the moment led her to much larger considerations ; but even those pages in which she is concerned with the programme to be followed by the Free French during the war and immediately after the Liberation show such foresight and maturity of judgment that they are of permanent value . This is , I think , among those works of hers already published , the one which approximates most closely to the form in which she might herself have chosen to release it . I have dwelt chiefly upon certain ideas which are to be met with in all her writings , with some emphasis upon her errors and exaggerations . I have taken this course in the belief that many readers , coming for the first time upon some assertion likely to arouse intellectual incredulity or emotional antagonism , might be deterred from improving their acquaintance with a great soul and a brilliant mind . Simone Weil needs patience from her readers , as she doubtless needed patience from the friends who most admired and appreciated her . But in spite of the violence of her affections and antipathies , in spite of such unjustified generalisations as I have instanced , I find in the present book especially a balanced judgment , a wisdom in avoiding extremes , astonishing in anyone so young . It may be that in her conversations with Gustave Thibon she profited more than she knew from her contact with that wise and well-balanced mind . As a political thinker , as in everything else , Simone Weil is not to be classified . The paradoxicality of her sympathies is a contributing cause of the equilibrium . On the one hand she was a passionate champion of the common people and especially of the oppressed—those oppressed by the wickedness and selfishness of men and those oppressed by the anonymous forces of modern society . She had worked in the Renault factory , she had worked as a field labourer , in order to share the life of people of town and country . On the other hand , she was by nature a solitary and an individualist , with a profound horror of what she called the collectivity—the monster created by modern totalitarianism . What she cared about was human souls . Her study of human rights and human obligations exposes the falsity of some of the verbiage still current which was used during the war to serve as a moral stimulant . Not the least striking example of her shrewdness , balance and good sense is her examination of the principle of monarchy ; and her short review of the political history of France is at once a condemnation of the French Revolution and a powerful argument against the possibility of a restoration of the kingship . She can not be classified either as a reactionary or as a socialist . This book belongs in that category of prolegomena to politics which politicians seldom read , and which most of them would be unlikely to understand or to know how to apply . Such books do not influence the contemporary conduct of affairs : for the men and women already engaged in this career and committed to the jargon of the market-place , they always come too late . This is one of those books which ought to be studied by the young before their leisure has been lost and their capacity for thought destroyed in the life of the hustings and the legislative assembly ; books the effect of which , we can only hope , will become apparent in the attitude of mind of another generation . T. S. ELIOT September 1951 1 La Pésanteur et la Grâce . 2 Attente de Dieu . 3 I use the term ‘ Israel ’ as she used it , and not , of course , with reference to the modern State . TRANSLATOR ’ S FOREWORD This book , published in France in 1949 under the title of L ’ Enracinement , and now offered in an English translation , was written during the early months of 1943 , in London . Towards the end of August of the same year , the author died at Ashford , Kent . Shortly after her arrival in England , the previous November , Simone Weil had been asked by the Free French in London to write a report on the possibilities of bringing about the regeneration of France . That report is this book , and in calling passionately upon her fellow-countrymen to set about recovering their spiritual roots before it is too late , and suggesting to them how this may be done , Simone Weil addresses herself to men of every nationality , but more particularly , of course , to those who share the spiritual heritage of the West . Every effort has been made to give a faithful rendering of the French text , to preserve its substance , style , actuality and sense of urgency . Both the publishers and the translator felt that to tamper in any way , on any grounds , with the original would be to take away from its directness of approach . Footnotes have therefore been added where considered necessary to situate any remark or reference no longer applicable , or only partially so , or having particular reference to France . It only remains for the translator to salute the spirit of the remarkable human being who lived and wrote the original . Paris December 1950 Part I The Needs of the Soul THE NEEDS OF THE SOUL The notion of obligations comes before that of rights , which is subordinate and relative to the former . A right is not effectual by itself , but only in relation to the obligation to which it corresponds , the effective exercise of a right springing not from the individual who possesses it , but from other men who consider themselves as being under a certain obligation towards him . Recognition of an obligation makes it effectual . An obligation which goes unrecognized by anybody loses none of the full force of its existence . A right which goes unrecognized by anybody is not worth very much . It makes nonsense to say that men have , on the one hand , rights , and on the other hand , obligations . Such words only express differences in point of view . The actual relationship between the two is as between object and subject . A man , considered in isolation , only has duties , amongst which are certain duties towards himself . Other men , seen from his point of view , only have rights . He , in his turn , has rights , when seen from the point of view of other men , who recognize that they have obligations towards him . A man left alone in the universe would have no rights whatever , but he would have obligations . The notion of rights , being of an objective order , is inseparable from the notions of existence and reality . This becomes apparent when the obligation descends to the realm of fact ; consequently , it always involves to a certain extent the taking into account of actual given states and particular situations . Rights are always found to be related to certain conditions . Obligations alone remain independent of conditions . They belong to a realm situated above all conditions , because it is situated above this world . The men of 1789 did not recognize the existence of such a realm . All they recognized was the one on the human plane . That is why they started off with the idea of rights . But at the same time they wanted to postulate absolute principles . This contradiction caused them to tumble into a confusion of language and ideas which is largely responsible for the present political and social confusion . The realm of what is eternal , universal , unconditioned is other than the one conditioned by facts , and different ideas hold sway there , ones which are related to the most secret recesses of the human soul . Obligations are only binding on human beings . There are no obligations for collectivities , as such . But they exist for all human beings who constitute , serve , command or represent a collectivity , in that part of their existence which is related to the collectivity as in that part which is independent of it . All human beings are bound by identical obligations , although these are performed in different ways according to particular circumstances . No human being , whoever he may be , under whatever circumstances , can escape them without being guilty of crime ; save where there are two genuine obligations which are in fact incompatible , and a man is forced to sacrifice one of them . The imperfections of a social order can be measured by the number of situations of this kind it harbours within itself . But even in such a case , a crime is committed if the obligation so sacrificed is not merely sacrificed in fact , but its existence denied into the bargain . The object of any obligation , in the realm of human affairs , is always the human being as such . There exists an obligation towards every human being for the sole reason that he or she is a human being , without any other condition requiring to be fulfilled , and even without any recognition of such obligation on the part of the individual concerned . This obligation is not based upon any de facto situation , nor upon jurisprudence , customs , social structure , relative state of forces , historical heritage , or presumed historical orientation ; for no de facto situation is able to create an obligation . This obligation is not based upon any convention ; for all conventions are liable to be modified according to the wishes of the contracting parties , whereas in this case no change in the mind and will of Man can modify anything whatsoever . This obligation is an eternal one . It is coextensive with the eternal destiny of human beings . Only human beings have an eternal destiny . Human collectivities have not got one . Nor are there , in regard to the latter , any direct obligations of an eternal nature . Duty towards the human being as such—that alone is eternal . This obligation is an unconditional one . If it is founded on something , that something , whatever it is , does not form part of our world . In our world , it is not founded on anything at all . It is the one and only obligation in connexion with human affairs that is not subject to any condition . This obligation has no foundation , but only a verification in the common consent accorded by the universal conscience . It finds expression in some of the oldest written texts which have come down to us . It is recognized by everybody without exception in every single case where it is not attacked as a result of interest or passion . And it is in relation to it that we measure our progress . The recognition of this obligation is expressed in a confused and imperfect form , that is , more or less imperfect according to the particular case , by what are called positive rights . To the extent to which positive rights are in contradiction with it , to that precise extent is their origin an illegitimate one . Although this eternal obligation is coextensive with the eternal destiny of the human being , this destiny is not its direct motive . A human being ’ s eternal destiny can not be the motive of any obligation , for it is not subordinate to external actions . The fact that a human being possesses an eternal destiny imposes only one obligation : respect . The obligation is only performed if the respect is effectively expressed in a real , not a fictitious , way ; and this can only be done through the medium of Man ’ s earthly needs . On this point , the human conscience has never varied . Thousands of years ago , the Egyptians believed that no soul could justify itself after death unless it could say : ‘ I have never let any one suffer from hunger. ’ All Christians know they are liable to hear Christ himself say to them one day : ‘ I was an hungered , and ye gave me meat. ’ Every one looks on progress as being , in the first place , a transition to a state of human society in which people will not suffer from hunger . To no matter whom the question may be put in general terms , nobody is of the opinion that any man is innocent if , possessing food himself in abundance and finding some one on his doorstep three parts dead from hunger , he brushes past without giving him anything . So it is an eternal obligation towards the human being not to let him suffer from hunger when one has the chance of coming to his assistance . This obligation being the most obvious of all , it can serve as a model on which to draw up the list of eternal duties towards each human being . In order to be absolutely correctly made out , this list ought to proceed from the example just given by way of analogy . Consequently , the list of obligations towards the human being should correspond to the list of such human needs as are vital , analogous to hunger . Among such needs , there are some which are physical , like hunger itself . They are fairly easy to enumerate . They are concerned with protection against violence , housing , clothing , heating , hygiene and medical attention in case of illness . There are others which have no connexion with the physical side of life , but are concerned with its moral side . Like the former , however , they are earthly , and are not directly related , so far as our intelligence is able to perceive , to the eternal destiny of Man . They form , like our physical needs , a necessary condition of our life on this earth . Which means to say that if they are not satisfied , we fall little by little into a state more or less resembling death , more or less akin to a purely vegetative existence . They are much more difficult to recognize and to enumerate than are the needs of the body . But every one recognizes that they exist . All the different forms of cruelty which a conqueror can exercise over a subject population , such as massacre , mutilation , organized famine , enslavement or large-scale deportation , are generally considered to be measures of a like description , even though a man ’ s liberty or his native land are not physical necessities . Every one knows that there are forms of cruelty which can injure a man ’ s life without injuring his body . They are such as deprive him of a certain form of food necessary to the life of the soul . Obligations , whether unconditional or relative , eternal or changing , direct or indirect with regard to human affairs , all stem , without exception , from the vital needs of the human being . Those which do not directly concern this , that or the other specific human being all exist to serve requirements which , with respect to Man , play a rôle analogous to food . We owe a cornfield respect , not because of itself , but because it is food for mankind . In the same way , we owe our respect to a collectivity , of whatever kind—country , family or any other—not for itself , but because it is food for a certain number of human souls . Actually , this obligation makes different attitudes , actions necessary according to different situations . But , taken by itself , it is absolutely identical for everybody . More particularly is this so for all those outside such a collectivity . The degree of respect owing to human collectivities is a very high one , for several reasons . To start with , each is unique , and , if destroyed , can not be replaced . One sack of corn can always be substituted for another sack of corn . The food which a collectivity supplies for the souls of those who form part of it has no equivalent in the entire universe . Secondly , because of its continuity , a collectivity is already moving forward into the future . It contains food , not only for the souls of the living , but also for the souls of beings yet unborn which are to come into the world during the immediately succeeding centuries . Lastly , due to this same continuity , a collectivity has its roots in the past . It constitutes the sole agency for preserving the spiritual treasures accumulated by the dead , the sole transmitting agency by means of which the dead can speak to the living . And the sole earthly reality which is directly connected with the eternal destiny of Man is the irradiating light of those who have managed to become fully conscious of this destiny , transmitted from generation to generation . Because of all this , it may happen that the obligation towards a collectivity which is in danger reaches the point of entailing a total sacrifice . But it does not follow from this that collectivities are superior to human beings . It sometimes happens , too , that the obligation to go to the help of a human being in distress makes a total sacrifice necessary , without that implying any superiority on the part of the individual so helped . A peasant may , under certain circumstances , be under the necessity , in order to cultivate his land , of risking exhaustion , illness or even death . But all the time he will be conscious of the fact that it is solely a matter of bread . Similarly , even when a total sacrifice is required , no more is owed to any collectivity whatever than a respect analogous to the one owed to food . It very often happens that the rôles are reversed . There are collectivities which , instead of serving as food , do just the opposite : they devour souls . In such cases , the social body is diseased , and the first duty is to attempt a cure ; in certain circumstances , it may be necessary to have recourse to surgical methods . With regard to this matter , too , the obligation for those inside as for those outside the collectivity is an identical one . It also happens that a collectivity supplies insufficient food for the souls of those forming part of it . In that case , it has to be improved . Finally , there are dead collectivities which , without devouring souls , don ’ t nourish them either . If it is absolutely certain that they are well and truly dead , that it isn ’ t just a question of a temporary lethargy , then and only then should they be destroyed . The first thing to be investigated is what are those needs which are for the life of the soul what the needs in the way of food , sleep and warmth are for the life of the body . We must try to enumerate and define them . They must never be confused with desires , whims , fancies and vices . We must also distinguish between what is fundamental and what is fortuitous . Man requires , not rice or potatoes , but food ; not wood or coal , but heating . In the same way , for the needs of the soul , we must recognize the different , but equivalent , sorts of satisfaction which cater for the same requirements . We must also distinguish between the soul ’ s foods and poisons which , for a time , can give the impression of occupying the place of the former . The lack of any such investigation forces governments , even when their intentions are honest , to act sporadically and at random . Below are offered a few indications . ORDER The first of the soul ’ s needs , the one which touches most nearly its eternal destiny , is order ; that is to say , a texture of social relationships such that no one is compelled to violate imperative obligations in order to carry out other ones . It is only where this , in fact , occurs that external circumstances have any power to inflict spiritual violence on the soul . For he for whom the threat of death or suffering is the one thing standing in the way of the performance of an obligation , can overcome this disability , and will only suffer in his body . But he who finds that circumstances , in fact , render the various acts necessitated by a series of strict obligations incompatible with one another is , without being able to offer any resistance thereto , made to suffer in his love of good . At the present time , a very considerable amount of confusion and incompatibility exists between obligations . Whoever acts in such a way as to increase this incompatibility is a trouble-maker . Whoever acts in such a way as to diminish it is an agent of order . Whoever , so as to simplify problems , denies the existence of certain obligations has , in his heart , made a compact with crime . Unfortunately , we possess no method for diminishing this incompatibility . We can not even be sure that the idea of an order in which all obligations would be compatible with one another isn ’ t itself a fiction . When duty descends to the level of facts , so many independent relationships are brought into play that incompatibility seems far more likely than compatibility . Nevertheless , we have every day before us the example of a universe in which an infinite number of independent mechanical actions concur so as to produce an order that , in the midst of variations , remains fixed . Furthermore , we love the beauty of the world , because we sense behind it the presence of something akin to that wisdom we should like to possess to slake our thirst for good . In a minor degree , really beautiful works of art are examples of ensembles in which independent factors concur , in a manner impossible to understand , so as to form a unique thing of beauty . Finally , a consciousness of the various obligations always proceeds from a desire for good which is unique , unchanging and identical with itself for every man , from the cradle to the grave . This desire , perpetually stirring in the depths of our being , makes it impossible for us ever to resign ourselves to situations in which obligations are incompatible with one another . Either we have recourse to lying in order to forget their existence , or we struggle blindly to extricate ourselves from them . The contemplation of veritable works of art , and much more still that of the beauty of the world , and again much more that of the unrealized good to which we aspire , can sustain us in our efforts to think continually about that human order which should be the subject uppermost in our minds . The great instigators of violence have encouraged themselves with the thought of how blind , mechanical force is sovereign throughout the whole universe . By looking at the world with keener senses than theirs , we shall find a more powerful encouragement in the thought of how these innumerable blind forces are limited , made to balance one against the other , brought to form a united whole by something which we do not understand , but which we call beauty . If we keep ever-present in our minds the idea of a veritable human order , if we think of it as of something to which a total sacrifice is due should the need arise , we shall be in a similar position to that of a man travelling , without a guide , through the night , but continually thinking of the direction he wishes to follow . Such a traveller ’ s way is lit by a great hope . Order is the first need of all ; it even stands above all needs properly so-called . To be able to conceive it , we must know what the other needs are . The first characteristic which distinguishes needs from desires , fancies or vices , and foods from gluttonous repasts or poisons , is that needs are limited , in exactly the same way as are the foods corresponding to them . A miser never has enough gold , but the time comes when any man provided with an unlimited supply of bread finds he has had enough . Food brings satiety . The same applies to the soul ’ s foods . The second characteristic , closely connected with the first , is that needs are arranged in antithetical pairs and have to combine together to form a balance . Man requires food , but also an interval between his meals ; he requires warmth and coolness , rest and exercise . Likewise in the case of the soul ’ s needs . What is called the golden mean actually consists in satisfying neither the one nor the other of two contrary needs . It is a caricature of the genuinely balanced state in which contrary needs are each fully satisfied in turn . LIBERTY One of the indispensable foods of the human soul is liberty . Liberty , taking the word in its concrete sense , consists in the ability to choose . We must understand by that , of course , a real ability . Wherever men are living in community , rules imposed in the common interest must necessarily limit the possibilities of choice . But a greater or lesser degree of liberty does not depend on whether the limits set are wider or narrower . Liberty attains its plenitude under conditions which are less easily gauged . Rules should be sufficiently sensible and sufficiently straightforward so that any one who so desires and is blessed with average powers of application may be able to understand , on the one hand the useful ends they serve , and on the other hand the actual necessities which have brought about their institution . They should emanate from a source of authority which is not looked upon as strange or hostile , but loved as something belonging to those placed under its direction . They should be sufficiently stable , general and limited in number for the mind to be able to grasp them once and for all , and not find itself brought up against them every time a decision has to be made . Under these conditions , the liberty of men of goodwill , though limited in the sphere of action , is complete in that of conscience . For , having incorporated the rules into their own being , the prohibited possibilities no longer present themselves to the mind , and have not to be rejected . Just as the habit , formed by education , of not eating disgusting or dangerous things is not felt by the normal man to be any limitation of his liberty in the domain of food . Only a child feels such a limitation . Those who are lacking in goodwill or who remain adolescent are never free under any form of society . When the possibilities of choice are so wide as to injure the commonweal , men cease to enjoy liberty . For they must either seek refuge in irresponsibility , puerility and indifference—a refuge where the most they can find is boredom—or feel themselves weighed down by responsibility at all times for fear of causing harm to others . Under such circumstances , men , believing , wrongly , that they are in possession of liberty , and feeling that they get no enjoyment out of it , end up by thinking that liberty is not a good thing . OBEDIENCE Obedience is a vital need of the human soul . It is of two kinds : obedience to established rules and obedience to human beings looked upon as leaders . It presupposes consent , not in regard to every single order received , but the kind of consent that is given once and for all , with the sole reservation , in case of need , that the demands of conscience be satisfied . It requires to be generally recognized , and above all by leaders themselves , that consent and not fear of punishment or hope of reward constitutes , in fact , the mainspring of obedience , so that submission may never be mistaken for servility . It should also be realized that those who command , obey in their turn , and the whole hierarchy should have its face set in the direction of a goal whose importance and even grandeur can be felt by all , from the highest to the lowest . Obedience being a necessary food of the soul , whoever is definitely deprived of it is ill . Thus , any body politic governed by a sovereign ruler accountable to nobody is in the hands of a sick man . That is why wherever a man is placed for life at the head of the social organism , he ought to be a symbol and not a ruler , as is the case with the king of England ; etiquette ought also to restrict his freedom more narrowly than that of any single man of the people . In this way , the effective rulers , rulers though they be , have somebody over them ; on the other hand , they are able to replace each other in unbroken continuity , and consequently to receive , each in his turn , that indispensable amount of obedience due to him . Those who keep masses of men in subjection by exercising force and cruelty deprive them at once of two vital foods , liberty and obedience ; for it is no longer within the power of such masses to accord their inner consent to the authority to which they are subjected . Those who encourage a state of things in which the hope of gain is the principal motive take away from men their obedience , for consent which is its essence is not something which can be sold . There are any number of signs showing that the men of our age have now for a long time been starved of obedience . But advantage has been taken of the fact to give them slavery . RESPONSIBILITY Initiative and responsibility , to feel one is useful and even indispensable , are vital needs of the human soul . Complete privation from this point of view is the case of the unemployed person , even if he receives assistance to the extent of being able to feed , clothe and house himself . For he represents nothing at all in the economic life of his country , and the voting paper which represents his share in its political life doesn ’ t hold any meaning for him . The manual labourer is in a scarcely better position . For this need to be satisfied it is necessary that a man should often have to take decisions in matters great or small affecting interests that are distinct from his own , but in regard to which he feels a personal concern . He also requires to be continually called upon to supply fresh efforts . Finally , he requires to be able to encompass in thought the entire range of activity of the social organism to which he belongs , including branches in connexion with which he has never to take a decision or offer any advice . For that , he must be made acquainted with it , be asked to interest himself in it , be brought to feel its value , its utility and , where necessary , its greatness , and be made fully aware of the part he plays in it . Every social organism , of whatever kind it may be , which does not provide its members with these satisfactions , is diseased and must be restored to health . In the case of every person of fairly strong character , the need to show initiative goes so far as the need to take command . A flourishing local and regional life , a host of educational activities and youth movements , ought to furnish whoever is able to take advantage of it with the opportunity to command at certain periods of his life . EQUALITY Equality is a vital need of the human soul . It consists in a recognition , at once public , general , effective and genuinely expressed in institutions and customs , that the same amount of respect and consideration is due to every human being because this respect is due to the human being as such and is not a matter of degree . It follows that the inevitable differences among men ought never to imply any difference in the degree of respect . And so that these differences may not be felt to bear such an implication , a certain balance is necessary between equality and inequality . A certain combination of equality and inequality is formed by equality of opportunity . If no matter who can attain the social rank corresponding to the function he is capable of filling , and if education is sufficiently generalized so that no one is prevented from developing any capacity simply on account of his birth , the prospects are the same for every child . In this way , the prospects for each man are the same as for any other man , both as regards himself when young , and as regards his children later on . But when such a combination acts alone , and not as one factor amongst other factors , it ceases to constitute a balance and contains great dangers . To begin with , for a man who occupies an inferior position and suffers from it to know that his position is a result of his incapacity and that everybody is aware of the fact is not any consolation , but an additional motive of bitterness ; according to the individual character , some men can thereby be thrown into a state of depression , while others can be encouraged to commit crime . Then , in social life , a sort of aspirator towards the top is inevitably created . If a descending movement does not come to balance this ascending movement , the social body becomes sick . To the extent to which it is really possible for the son of a farm labourer to become one day a minister , to the same extent should it really be possible for the son of a minister to become one day a farm labourer . This second possibility could never assume any noticeable proportions without a very dangerous degree of social constraint . This sort of equality , if allowed full play by itself , can make social life fluid to the point of decomposing it . There are less clumsy methods of combining equality with differentiation . The first is by using proportion . Proportion can be defined as the combination of equality with inequality , and everywhere throughout the universe it is the sole factor making for balance . Applied to the maintenance of social equilibrium , it would impose on each man burdens corresponding to the power and well-being he enjoys , and corresponding risks in cases of incapacity or neglect . For instance , an employer who is incapable or guilty of an offence against his workmen ought to be made to suffer far more , both in the spirit and in the flesh , than a workman who is incapable or guilty of an offence against his employer . Furthermore , all workmen ought to know that this is so . It would imply , on the one hand , a certain rearrangement with regard to risks , on the other hand , in criminal law , a conception of punishment in which social rank , as an aggravating circumstance , would necessarily play an important part in deciding what the penalty was to be . All the more reason , therefore , why the exercise of important public functions should carry with it serious personal risks . Another way of rendering equality compatible with differentiation would be to take away as far as possible all quantitative character from differences . Where there is only a difference in kind , not in degree , there is no inequality at all . By making money the sole , or almost the sole , motive of all actions , the sole , or almost the sole , measure of all things , the poison of inequality has been introduced everywhere . It is true that this inequality is mobile ; it is not attached to persons , for money is made and lost ; it is none the less real . There are two sorts of inequality , each with its corresponding stimulant . A more or less stable inequality , like that of ancient France , produces an idolizing of superiors—not without a mixture of repressed hatred—and a submission to their commands . A mobile , fluid inequality produces a desire to better oneself . It is no nearer to equality than is stable inequality , and is every bit as unwholesome . The Revolution of 1789 , in putting forward equality , only succeeded in reality in sanctioning the substitution of one form of inequality for another . The more equality there is in a society , the smaller is the action of the two stimulants connected with the two forms of inequality , and hence other stimulants are necessary . Equality is all the greater in proportion as different human conditions are regarded as being , not more nor less than one another , but simply as other . Let us look on the professions of miner and minister simply as two different vocations , like those of poet and mathematician . And let the material hardships attaching to the miner ’ s condition be counted in honour of those who undergo them . In wartime , if an army is filled with the right spirit , a soldier is proud and happy to be under fire instead of at headquarters ; a general is proud and happy to think that the successful outcome of the battle depends on his forethought ; and at the same time the soldier admires the general and the general the soldier . Such a balance constitutes an equality . There would be equality in social conditions if this balance could be found therein . It would mean honouring each human condition with those marks of respect which are proper to it , and are not just a hollow pretence . HIERARCHISM Hierarchism is a vital need of the human soul . It is composed of a certain veneration , a certain devotion towards superiors , considered not as individuals , nor in relation to the powers they exercise , but as symbols . What they symbolize is that realm situated high above all men and whose expression in this world is made up of the obligations owed by each man to his fellowmen . A veritable hierarchy presupposes a consciousness on the part of the superiors of this symbolic function and a realization that it forms the only legitimate object of devotion among their subordinates . The effect of true hierarchism is to bring each one to fit himself morally into the place he occupies . HONOUR Honour is a vital need of the human soul . The respect due to every human being as such , even if effectively accorded , is not sufficient to satisfy this need , for it is identical for every one and unchanging ; whereas honour has to do with a human being considered not simply as such , but from the point of view of his social surroundings . This need is fully satisfied where each of the social organisms to which a human being belongs allows him to share in a noble tradition enshrined in its past history and given public acknowledgment . For example , for the need of honour to be satisfied in professional life , every profession requires to have some association really capable of keeping alive the memory of all the store of nobility , heroism , probity , generosity and genius spent in the exercise of that profession . All oppression creates a famine in regard to the need of honour , for the noble traditions possessed by those suffering oppression go unrecognized , through lack of social prestige . Conquest always has that effect . Vercingetorix was no hero to the Romans . Had France been conquered by the English in the fifteenth century , Joan of Arc would be well and truly forgotten , even to a great extent by us . We now talk about her to the Annamites and the Arabs ; but they know very well that here in France we don ’ t allow their heroes and saints to be talked about ; therefore the state in which we keep them is an affront to their honour . Social oppression has the same effects . Guynemer and Mermoz have become part of the public consciousness , thanks to the social prestige of aviation ; the sometimes incredible heroism displayed by miners or fishermen barely awakes an echo among miners or fishermen themselves . Deprivation of honour attains its extreme degree with that total deprivation of respect reserved for certain categories of human beings . In France , this affects , under various forms , prostitutes , ex-convicts , police agents and the sub-proletariat composed of colonial immigrants and natives . Categories of this kind ought not to exist . Crime alone should place the individual who has committed it outside the social pale , and punishment should bring him back again inside it . PUNISHMENT Punishment is a vital need of the human soul . There are two kinds of punishment , disciplinary and penal . The former offers security against failings with which it would be too exhausting to struggle if there were no exterior support . But the most indispensable punishment for the soul is that inflicted for crime . By committing crime , a man places himself , of his own accord , outside the chain of eternal obligations which bind every human being to every other one . Punishment alone can weld him back again ; fully so , if accompanied by consent on his part ; otherwise only partially so . Just as the only way of showing respect for somebody suffering from hunger is to give him something to eat , so the only way of showing respect for somebody who has placed himself outside the law is to reinstate him inside the law by subjecting him to the punishment ordained by the law . The need of punishment is not satisfied where , as is generally the case , the penal code is merely a method of exercising pressure through fear . So that this need may be satisfied , it is above all necessary that everything connected with the penal law should wear a solemn and consecrated aspect ; that the majesty of the law should make its presence felt by the court , the police , the accused , the guilty man—even when the case dealt with is of minor importance , provided it entails a possible loss of liberty . Punishment must be an honour . It must not only wipe out the stigma of the crime , but must be regarded as a supplementary form of education , compelling a higher devotion to the public good . The severity of the punishment must also be in keeping with the kind of obligation which has been violated , and not with the interests of public security . The discredit attaching to the police , the irresponsible conduct of the judiciary , the prison system , the permanent social stigma cast upon ex-convicts , the scale of penalties which provides a much harsher punishment for ten acts of petty larceny than for one rape or certain types of murder , and which even provides punishments for ordinary misfortune—all this makes it impossible for there to exist among us , in France , anything that deserves the name of punishment . For offences , as for crimes , the relative degree of immunity should increase , not as you go up , but as you go down the social scale . Otherwise the hardships inflicted will be felt to be in the nature of constraints or even abuses of power , and will no longer constitute punishments . Punishment only takes place where the hardship is accompanied at some time or another , even after it is over , and in retrospect , by a feeling of justice . Just as the musician awakens the sense of beauty in us by sounds , so the penal system should know how to awaken the sense of justice in the criminal by the infliction of pain , or even , if need be , of death . And in the same way as we can say of the apprentice who injures himself at his trade , that it is the trade which is getting into him , so punishment is a method for getting justice into the soul of the criminal by bodily suffering . The question of the best means to employ to prevent a conspiracy from arising in high places with the object of obtaining immunity from the law , is one of the most difficult political problems to solve . It can only be solved if there are men whose duty it is to prevent such a conspiracy , and whose situation in life is such that they are not tempted to enter it themselves . FREEDOM OF OPINION Freedom of opinion and freedom of association are usually classed together . It is a mistake . Save in the case of natural groupings , association is not a need , but an expedient employed in the practical affairs of life . On the other hand , complete , unlimited freedom of expression for every sort of opinion , without the least restriction or reserve , is an absolute need on the part of the intelligence . It follows from this that it is a need of the soul , for when the intelligence is ill-at-ease the whole soul is sick . The nature and limits of the satisfaction corresponding to this need are inscribed in the very structure of the various faculties of the soul . For the same thing can be at once limited and unlimited , just as one can produce the length of a rectangle indefinitely without it ceasing to be limited in width . In the case of a human being , the intelligence can be exercised in three ways . It can work on technical problems , that is to say , discover means to achieve an already given objective . It can provide light when a choice lies before the will concerning the path to be followed . Finally , it can operate alone , separately from the other faculties , in a purely theoretical speculation where all question of action has been provisionally set aside . When the soul is in a healthy condition , it is exercised in these three ways in turn , with different degrees of freedom . In the first function , it acts as a servant . In the second function , it acts destructively and requires to be reduced to silence immediately it begins to supply arguments to that part of the soul which , in the case of any one not in a state of perfection , always places itself on the side of evil . But when it operates alone and separately , it must be in possession of sovereign liberty ; otherwise something essential is wanting to the human being . The same applies in a healthy society . That is why it would be desirable to create an absolutely free reserve in the field of publication , but in such a way as for it to be understood that the works found therein did not pledge their authors in any way and contained no direct advice for readers . There it would be possible to find , set out in their full force , all the arguments in favour of bad causes . It would be an excellent and salutary thing for them to be so displayed . Anybody could there sing the praises of what he most condemns . It would be publicly recognized that the object of such works was not to define their authors ’ attitudes vis-à-vis the problems of life , but to contribute , by preliminary researches , towards a complete and correct tabulation of data concerning each problem . The law would see to it that their publication did not involve any risk of whatever kind for the author . On the other hand , publications destined to influence what is called opinion , that is to say , in effect , the conduct of life , constitute acts and ought to be subjected to the same restrictions as are all acts . In other words , they should not cause unlawful harm of any kind to any human being , and above all , should never contain any denial , explicit or implicit , of the eternal obligations towards the human being , once these obligations have been solemnly recognized by law . The distinction between the two fields , the one which is outside action and the one which forms part of action , is impossible to express on paper in juridical terminology . But that doesn ’ t prevent it from being a perfectly clear one . The separate existence of these two fields is not difficult to establish in fact , if only the will to do so is sufficiently strong . It is obvious , for example , that the entire daily and weekly press comes within the second field ; reviews also , for they all constitute , individually , a focus of radiation in regard to a particular way of thinking ; only those which were to renounce this function would be able to lay claim to total liberty . The same applies to literature . It would solve the argument which arose not long ago on the subject of literature and morals , and which was clouded over by the fact that all the talented people , through professional solidarity , were found on one side , and only fools and cowards on the other . But the attitude of the fools and cowards was none the less , to a large extent , consistent with the demands of reason . Writers have an outrageous habit of playing a double game . Never so much as in our age have they claimed the rôle of directors of conscience and exercised it . Actually , during the years immediately preceding the war , no one challenged their right to it except the savants . The position formerly occupied by priests in the moral life of the country was held by physicists and novelists , which is sufficient to gauge the value of our progress . But if somebody called upon writers to render an account of the orientation set by their influence , they barricaded themselves indignantly behind the sacred privilege of art for art ’ s sake . There is not the least doubt , for example , that André Gide has always known that books like the Nourritures Terrestres and the Caves du Vatican have exercised an influence on the practical conduct of life of hundreds of young people , and he has been proud of the fact . There is , then , no reason for placing such books behind the inviolable barrier of art for art ’ s sake , and sending to prison a young fellow who pushes somebody off a train in motion.1 One might just as well claim the privileges of art for art ’ s sake in support of crime . At one time the Surrealists came pretty close to doing so . All that has been repeated by so many idiots ad nauseam about the responsibility of our writers in the defeat of France in 1940 is , unfortunately , only too true . If a writer , thanks to the complete freedom of expression accorded to pure intelligence , publishes written matter which goes contrary to the moral principles recognized by law , and if later on he becomes a notorious focus of influence , it is simple enough to ask him if he is prepared to state publicly that his writings do not express his personal attitude . If he is not prepared to do so , it is simple enough to punish him . If he lies , it is simple enough to discredit him . Moreover , it ought to be recognized that the moment a writer fills a rôle among the influences directing public opinion , he can not claim to exercise unlimited freedom . Here again , a juridical definition is impossible ; but the facts are not really difficult to discern . There is no reason at all why the sovereignty of the law should be limited to the field of what can be expressed in legal formulae , since that sovereignty is exercised just as well by judgments in equity . Besides , the need of freedom itself , so essential to the intellect , calls for a corresponding protection against suggestion , propaganda , influence by means of obsession . These are methods of constraint , a special kind of constraint , not accompanied by fear or physical distress , but which is none the less a form of violence . Modern technique places extremely potent instruments at its service . This constraint is , by its very nature , collective , and human souls are its victims . Naturally , the State is guilty of crime if it makes use of such methods itself , save in cases where the public safety is absolutely at stake . But it should , furthermore , prevent their use . Publicity , for example , should be rigorously controlled by law and its volume very considerably reduced ; it should also be severely prohibited from ever dealing with subjects which belong to the domain of thought . Likewise , repression could be exercised against the press , radio broadcasts , or anything else of a similar kind , not only for offences against moral principles publicly recognized , but also for baseness of tone and thought , bad taste , vulgarity or a subtly corrupting moral atmosphere . This sort of repression could take place without in any way infringing on freedom of opinion . For instance , a newspaper could be suppressed without the members of its editorial staff losing the right to go on publishing wherever they liked , or even , in the less serious cases , remain associated to carry on the same paper under another name . Only , it would have been publicly branded with infamy and would run the risk of being so again . Freedom of opinion can be claimed solely—and even then with certain reservations—by the journalist , not by the paper ; for it is only the journalist who is capable of forming an opinion . Generally speaking , all problems to do with freedom of expression are clarified if it is posited that this freedom is a need of the intelligence , and that intelligence resides solely in the human being , individually considered . There is no such thing as a collective exercise of the intelligence . It follows that no group can legitimately claim freedom of expression , because no group has the slightest need of it . In fact the opposite applies . Protection of freedom of thought requires that no group should be permitted by law to express an opinion . For when a group starts having opinions , it inevitably tends to impose them on its members . Sooner or later , these individuals find themselves debarred , with a greater or lesser degree of severity , and on a number of problems of greater or lesser importance , from expressing opinions opposed to those of the group , unless they care to leave it . But a break with any group to which one belongs always involves suffering—at any rate of a sentimental kind . And just as danger , exposure to suffering are healthy and necessary elements in the sphere of action , so are they unhealthy influences in the exercise of the intelligence . A fear , even a passing one , always provokes either a weakening or a tautening , depending on the degree of courage , and that is all that is required to damage the extremely delicate and fragile instrument of precision which constitutes our intelligence . Even friendship is , from this point of view , a great danger . The intelligence is defeated as soon as the expression of one ’ s thoughts is preceded , explicitly or implicitly , by the little word ‘ we ’ . And when the light of the intelligence grows dim , it is not very long before the love of good becomes lost . The immediate , practical solution would be the abolition of political parties . Party strife , as it existed under the Third Republic , is intolerable . The single party , which is , moreover , its inevitable outcome , is the worst evil of all . The only remaining possibility is a public life without parties . Nowadays , such an idea strikes us as a novel and daring proposition . All the better , since something novel is what is wanted . But , in point of fact , it is only going back to the tradition of 1789 . In the eyes of the people of 1789 , there was literally no other possibility . A public life like ours has been over the course of the last half-century would have seemed to them a hideous nightmare . They would never have believed it possible that a representative of the people should so divest himself of all personal dignity as to allow himself to become the docile member of a party . Moreover , Rousseau had clearly demonstrated how party strife automatically destroys the Republic . He had foretold its effects . It would be a good thing just now to encourage the reading of the Contrat Social . Actually , at the present time , wherever there were political parties , democracy is dead . We all know that the parties in England have a certain tradition , spirit and function making it impossible to compare them to anything else . We all know , besides , that the rival teams in the United States are not political parties . A democracy where public life is made up of strife between political parties is incapable of preventing the formation of a party whose avowed aim is the overthrow of that democracy . If such a democracy brings in discriminatory laws , it cuts its own throat . If it doesn ’ t , it is just as safe as a little bird in front of a snake . A distinction ought to be drawn between two sorts of associations : those concerned with interests , where organization and discipline would be countenanced up to a certain point , and those concerned with ideas , where such things would be strictly forbidden . Under present conditions , it is a good thing to allow people to group themselves together to defend their interests , in other words , their wage receipts and so forth , and to leave these associations to act within very narrow limits and under the constant supervision of the authorities . But such associations should not be allowed to have anything to do with ideas . Associations in which ideas are being canvassed should be not so much associations as more or less fluid social mediums . When some action is contemplated within them , there is no reason why it need be put into execution by any persons other than those who approve of it . In the working-class movement , for example , such a distinction would put an end to the present inextricable confusion . In the period before the war , the working-man ’ s attention was being continually pulled in three directions at once . In the first place , by the struggle for higher wages ; secondly , by what remained—growing ever feebler , but still showing some signs of life—of the old trade-union spirit of former days , idealist and more or less libertarian in character ; and , lastly , by the political parties . Very often , when a strike was on , the workmen who struggled and suffered would have been quite incapable of deciding for themselves whether it was all a matter of wages , a revival of the old trade-union spirit , or a political manoeuvre conducted by a party ; and nobody looking on from the outside was in any better position to judge . That is an impossible state of affairs . When the war broke out , the French trade-unions were dead or moribund , in spite of their millions of members—or because of them . They again took on some semblance of life , after a prolonged lethargy , when the Resistance against the invader got under way . That doesn ’ t prove that they are viable . It is perfectly clear that they had been all but destroyed by two sorts of poison , each of which by itself is deadly . Trade-unions can not flourish if at their meetings the workmen are obsessed by their earnings to the same extent as they are in the factory , when engaged in piece-work . To begin with , because the result is that sort of moral death always brought about by an obsession in regard to money . Next , because the trade-union , having become , under present social conditions , a factor continually acting upon the economic life of the country , ends up inevitably by being transformed into a single , compulsory , professional organization , obliged to toe the line in public affairs . It has then been changed into the semblance of a corpse . Besides , it is no less evident that trade-unions can not live in intimate contact with political parties . There is something resulting from the normal play of mechanical forces which makes such a thing quite impossible . For an analogous reason , moreover , the Socialist Party can not live side by side with the Communist Party , because the latter ’ s party character is , as it were , marked to a so much greater degree . Furthermore , the obsession about wages strengthens Communist influence , because questions to do with money , however closely they may affect the majority of men , produce at the same time in all men a sensation of such deadly boredom that it requires to be compensated by the apocalyptic prospect of the Revolution , according to Communist tenets . If the middle-classes haven ’ t the same need of an apocalypse , it is because long rows of figures have a poetry , a prestige which tempers in some sort the boredom associated with money ; whereas , when money is counted in sixpences , we have boredom in its pure , unadulterated state . Nevertheless , the taste shown by bourgeois , both great and small , for Fascism , indicates that , in spite of everything , they too can feel bored . Under the Vichy Government , single and compulsory professional organizations for workmen have been created . It is a pity that they have been given , according to the modern fashion , the name of corporation , which denotes , in reality , something so very different and so beautiful . But it is a good thing that such dead organizations should be there to take over the dead part of trade-union activity . It would be dangerous to do away with them . It is far better to charge them with the day-to-day business of dealing with wages and what are called immediate demands . As for the political parties , if they were all strictly prohibited in a general atmosphere of liberty , it is to be hoped their underground existence would at any rate be made difficult for them . In that event , the workmen ’ s trade-unions , if they still retain a spark of any real life , could become again , little by little , the expression of working-class thought , the instrument of working-class integrity . According to the traditions of the French working-class movement , which has always looked upon itself as responsible for the whole world , they would concern themselves with everything to do with justice—including , where necessary , questions about wages ; but only at long intervals and to rescue human beings from poverty . Naturally , they would have to be able to exert an influence on professional organizations , according to methods of procedure defined by law . There would , perhaps , only be advantages to be gained by making it illegal for professional organizations to launch a strike , and allowing trade-unions—with certain restrictions—to do so , while at the same time attaching risks to this responsibility , prohibiting any sort of coercion , and safeguarding the continuity of economic life . As for the lock-out , there is no reason why it should not be entirely suppressed . The authorized existence of associations for promoting ideas could be subject to two conditions . First , that excommunication may not be applied . Recruitment would be voluntary and as a result of personal affinity , without , however , making anybody liable to be invited to subscribe to a collection of assertions crystallized in written form . But once a member had been admitted , he could not be expelled except for some breach of integrity or undermining activities ; which latter offence would , moreover , imply the existence of an illegal organization , and consequently expose the offender to a more severe punishment . This would , in fact , amount to a measure of public safety , experience having shown that totalitarian States are set up by totalitarian parties , and that these totalitarian parties are formed by dint of expulsions for the crime of having an opinion of one ’ s own . The second condition could be that ideas must really be put into circulation , and tangible proof of such circulation given in the shape of pamphlets , reviews or typed bulletins in which problems of general interest were discussed . Too great a uniformity of opinion would render any such association suspect . For the rest , all associations for promoting ideas would be authorized to act according as they thought fit , on condition that they didn ’ t break the law or exert any sort of disciplinary pressure on their members . As regards associations for promoting interests , their control would , in the first place , involve the making of a distinction , namely , that the word ‘ interest ’ sometimes expresses a need and at other times something quite different . In the case of a poor working-man , interest means food , lodging and heating . For an employer , it means something of a different kind . When the word is taken in its first sense , the action of the authorities should be mainly to stimulate , uphold and defend the interests concerned . When used in its second sense , the action of the authorities should be continually to supervise , limit and , whenever possible , curb the activities of the associations representing such interests . It goes without saying that the severest restrictions and the hardest punishments should be reserved for those which are , by their nature , the most powerful . What has been called freedom of association has been , in fact , up to now , freedom for associations . But associations have not got to be free ; they are instruments , they must be held in bondage . Only the human being is fit to be free . As regards freedom of thought , it is very nearly true to say that without freedom there is no thought . But it is truer still to say that when thought is non-existent , it is non-free into the bargain . There has been a lot of freedom of thought over the past few years , but no thought . Rather like the case of a child who , not having any meat , asks for salt with which to season it . SECURITY Security is an essential need of the soul . Security means that the soul is not under the weight of fear or terror , except as the result of an accidental conjunction of circumstances and for brief and exceptional periods . Fear and terror , as permanent states of the soul , are wellnigh mortal poisons , whether they be caused by the threat of unemployment , police persecution , the presence of a foreign conqueror , the probability of invasion , or any other calamity which seems too much for human strength to bear . The Roman masters used to place a whip in the hall within sight of their slaves , knowing that this spectacle reduced their hearts to that half-dead condition indispensable for slavery . On the other hand , according to the Egyptians , the just man should be able to say after death : ‘ I never caused any one any fear ’ . Even if permanent fear constitutes a latent state only , so that its painful effects are only rarely experienced directly , it remains always a disease . It is a semi-paralysis of the soul . RISK Risk is an essential need of the soul . The absence of risk produces a type of boredom which paralyses in a different way from fear , but almost as much . Moreover , there are certain situations which , involving as they do a diffused anguish without any clearly defined risks , spread the two kinds of disease at once . Risk is a form of danger which provokes a deliberate reaction ; that is to say , it doesn ’ t go beyond the soul ’ s resources to the point of crushing the soul beneath a load of fear . In some cases , there is a gambling aspect to it ; in others , where some definite obligation forces a man to face it , it represents the finest possible stimulant . The protection of mankind from fear and terror doesn ’ t imply the abolition of risk ; it implies , on the contrary , the permanent presence of a certain amount of risk in all aspects of social life ; for the absence of risk weakens courage to the point of leaving the soul , if the need should arise , without the slightest inner protection against fear . All that is wanted is for risk to offer itself under such conditions that it is not transformed into a sensation of fatality . PRIVATE PROPERTY Private property is a vital need of the soul . The soul feels isolated , lost , if it is not surrounded by objects which seem to it like an extension of the bodily members . All men have an invincible inclination to appropriate in their own minds anything which over a long , uninterrupted period they have used for their work , pleasure or the necessities of life . Thus , a gardener , after a certain time , feels that the garden belongs to him . But where the feeling of appropriation doesn ’ t coincide with any legally recognized proprietorship , men are continually exposed to extremely painful spiritual wrenches . Once we recognize private property to be a need , this implies for everyone the possibility of possessing something more than the articles of ordinary consumption . The forms this need takes can vary considerably , depending on circumstances ; but it is desirable that the majority of people should own their house and a little piece of land round it , and , whenever not technically impossible , the tools of their trade . Land and livestock figure among the tools necessary to the peasant ’ s trade . The principle of private property is violated where the land is worked by agricultural labourers and farm-hands under the orders of an estate-manager , and owned by townsmen who receive the profits . For of all those who are connected with that land , there is not one who , in one way or another , is not a stranger to it . It is wasted , not from the point of view of corn-production , but from that of the satisfaction of the property-need which it could procure . Between this extreme case and that other one of the peasant who cultivates with his family the land he owns , there are a number of intermediate states where Man ’ s need of appropriation is more or less unrecognized . COLLECTIVE PROPERTY Participation in collective possessions—a participation consisting not in any material enjoyment , but in a feeling of ownership—is a no less important need . It is more a question of a state of mind than of any legal formula . Where a real civic life exists , each one feels he has a personal ownership in the public monuments , gardens , ceremonial pomp and circumstance ; and a display of sumptuousness , in which nearly all human beings seek fulfilment , is in this way placed within the reach of even the poorest . But it isn ’ t just the State which ought to provide this satisfaction ; it is every sort of collectivity in turn . A great modern factory is a waste from the point of view of the need of property ; for it is unable to provide either the workers , or the manager who is paid his salary by the board of directors , or the members of the board who never visit it , or the shareholders who are unaware of its existence , with the least satisfaction in connexion with this need . When methods of exchange and acquisition are such as to involve a waste of material and moral foods , it is time they were transformed . There is no natural connexion between property and money . The connexion established nowadays is merely the result of a system which has made money the focus of all other possible motives . This system being an unhealthy one , we must bring about a dissociation in inverse order . The true criterion in regard to property is that it is legitimate so long as it is real . Or , to be more precise , the laws concerning property are so much the better the more advantages they draw from the opportunities offered by the possessions of this world for the satisfaction of the property-need common to all men . Consequently , the present modes of acquisition and possession require to be transformed in the name of the principle of property . Any form of possession which doesn ’ t satisfy somebody ’ s need of private or collective property can reasonably be regarded as useless . That does not mean that it is necessary to transfer it to the State ; but rather to try and turn it into some genuine form of property . TRUTH The need of truth is more sacred than any other need . Yet it is never mentioned . One feels afraid to read when once one has realized the quantity and the monstrousness of the material falsehoods shamelessly paraded , even in the books of the most reputable authors . Thereafter one reads as though one were drinking from a contaminated well . There are men who work eight hours a day and make the immense effort of reading in the evenings so as to acquire knowledge . It is impossible for them to go and verify their sources in the big libraries . They have to take the book on trust . One has no right to give them spurious provender . What sense is there in pleading that authors act in good faith ? They don ’ t have to do physical labour for eight hours a day . Society provides for their sustenance so that they may have the leisure and give themselves the trouble to avoid error . A pointsman responsible for a train accident and pleading good faith would hardly be given a sympathetic hearing . All the more reason why it is disgraceful to tolerate the existence of newspapers on which , as everybody knows , not one of the collaborators would be able to stop , unless he were prepared from time to time to tamper knowingly with the truth . The public is suspicious of newspapers , but its suspicions don ’ t save it . Knowing , in a general way , that a newspaper contains both true and false statements , it divides the news up into these two categories , but in a rough-and-ready fashion , in accordance with its own predilections . It is thus delivered over to error . We all know that when journalism becomes indistinguishable from organized lying , it constitutes a crime . But we think it is a crime impossible to punish . What is there to stop the punishment of activities once they are recognized to be criminal ones ? Where does this strange notion of non-punishable crimes come from ? It constitutes one of the most monstrous deformations of the judicial spirit . Isn ’ t it high time it were proclaimed that every discernible crime is a punishable one , and that we are resolved , if given the opportunity , to punish all crimes ? A few straightforward measures of public salubrity would protect the population from offences against the truth . The first would be to set up , with such protection in view , special courts enjoying the highest prestige , composed of judges specially selected and trained . They would be responsible for publicly condemning any avoidable error , and would be able to sentence to prison or hard labour for repeated commission of the offence , aggravated by proven dishonesty of intention . For instance , a lover of Ancient Greece , reading in one of Maritain ’ s books : ‘ The greatest thinkers of antiquity had not thought of condemning slavery ’ , would indict Maritain before one of these tribunals . He would take along with him the only important reference to slavery that has come down to us—the one from Aristotle . He would invite the judges to read the sentence : ‘ Some people assert that slavery is absolutely contrary to nature and reason. ’ He would observe that there is nothing to make us suppose these particular ‘ people ’ were not among the greatest thinkers of antiquity . The court would censure Maritain for having published—when it was so easy for him to avoid falling into such a mistake—a false assertion , and one constituting , however unintentionally , an outrageous calumny against an entire civilization . All the daily papers , weeklies and others ; all the reviews and the radio would be obliged to bring the court ’ s censure to the notice of the public , and , if need be , Maritain ’ s answer . In this particular case , it seems most unlikely there could be one . On the occasion when Gringoire2 published in extenso a speech attributed to a Spanish anarchist , who had been announced as going to speak at a meeting in Paris , but who in fact , at the last minute , had been unable to leave Spain , a court of this kind would not have been out of place . Dishonesty being in such a case more patent than that two and two make four , no doubt prison or hard labour would not have been too severe a sentence . Under this system , anybody , no matter who , discovering an avoidable error in a printed text or radio broadcast , would be entitled to bring an action before these courts . The second measure would be to prohibit entirely all propaganda of whatever kind by the radio or daily press . These two instruments would only be allowed to be used for non-tendentious information . The aforesaid courts would be there to see that the information supplied was not tendentious . In the case of organs of information , they might have to pronounce judgment concerning not only erroneous assertions , but also intentional and tendentious omissions . Circles in which ideas are discussed , and which desire to make them known , would only have a right to publish weekly , fortnightly or monthly journals . There is absolutely no need to appear more frequently in print , if one ’ s object is to make people think instead of stupefying them . The propriety of the methods of persuasion used would be guaranteed , thanks to the control exercised by the above courts , which would be able to suppress any publication guilty of too frequent a distortion of the truth ; though the editors would be allowed to let it reappear under another name . Nothing in all this would involve the slightest attack on public liberty . It would only mean satisfaction of the human soul ’ s most sacred need—protection against suggestion and falsehood . But , it will be objected , how can we guarantee the impartiality of the judges ? The only guarantee , apart from that of their complete independence , is that they should be drawn from very different social circles ; be naturally gifted with a wide , clear and exact intelligence ; and be trained in a school where they receive not just a legal education , but above all a spiritual one , and only secondarily an intellectual one . They must become accustomed to love truth . There is no possible chance of satisfying a people ’ s need of truth , unless men can be found for this purpose who love truth . 1 ‘ d ’ emprisonner un garçon qui jette quelqu ’ un hors d ’ un train en marche ’ : a reference to a gratuitous act performed by Lafcadio , hero of André Gide ’ s Caves du Vatican , who pushes somebody off a train in Italy to prove to himself that he is capable of committing any act whatever , however motiveless , unrelated to preceding events . [ Translator . ] 2 Gringoire : a pre-war weekly of a virulent turn and politically reactionary [ Translator . ] Part II Uprootedness UPROOTEDNESS To be rooted is perhaps the most important and least recognized need of the human soul . It is one of the hardest to define . A human being has roots by virtue of his real , active and natural participation in the life of a community which preserves in living shape certain particular treasures of the past and certain particular expectations for the future . This participation is a natural one , in the sense that it is automatically brought about by place , conditions of birth , profession and social surroundings . Every human being needs to have multiple roots . It is necessary for him to draw wellnigh the whole of his moral , intellectual and spiritual life by way of the environment of which he forms a natural part . Reciprocal exchanges by which different sorts of environment exert influence on one another are no less vital than to be rooted in natural surroundings . But a given environment should not receive an outside influence as something additional to itself , but as a stimulant intensifying its own particular way of life . It should draw nourishment from outside contributions only after having digested them , and the human beings who compose it should receive such contributions only from its hands . When a really talented painter walks into a picture gallery , his own originality is thereby confirmed . The same thing should apply to the various communities throughout the world and the different social environments . Uprootedness occurs whenever there is a military conquest , and in this sense conquest is nearly always an evil . There is the minimum of uprootedness when the conquerors are migrants who settle down in the conquered country , intermarry with the inhabitants and take root themselves . Such was the case with the Hellenes in Greece , the Celts in Gaul and the Moors in Spain . But when the conqueror remains a stranger in the land of which he has taken possession , uprootedness becomes an almost mortal disease among the subdued population . It reaches its most acute stage when there are deportations on a massive scale , as in Europe under the German occupation , or along the upper loop of the Niger , or where there is any brutal suppression of all local traditions , as in the French possessions in the Pacific ( if Gauguin and Alain Gerbault are to be believed ) . Even without a military conquest , money-power and economic domination can so impose a foreign influence as actually to provoke this disease of uprootedness . Finally , the social relations existing in any one country can be very dangerous factors in connexion with uprootedness . In all parts of our country at the present time—and setting aside the question of the conquest—there are two poisons at work spreading this disease . One of them is money . Money destroys human roots wherever it is able to penetrate , by turning desire for gain into the sole motive . It easily manages to outweigh all other motives , because the effort it demands of the mind is so very much less . Nothing is so clear and so simple as a row of figures . UPROOTEDNESS IN THE TOWNS There are social conditions in which an absolute and continuous dependence on money prevails—those of the wage-earning class , especially now that piece-work obliges each workman to have his attention continually taken up with the subject of his pay . It is in these social conditions that the disease of uprootedness is most acute . Bernanos has said that our workmen are not , after all , immigrants like those of Mr. Ford . The major social difficulty of our age proceeds from the fact that in a certain sense they are like them . Although they have remained geographically stationary , they have been morally uprooted , banished and then reinstated , as it were on sufferance , in the form of industrial brawn . Unemployment is , of course , an uprootedness raised to the second power . They are unable to feel themselves at home whether it be in the factories , their own dwellings , the parties and trade-unions ostensibly created on their behalf , places of amusement , or in intellectual activities if they attempt to acquire some culture . For the second factor making for uprootedness is education as it is understood nowadays . The Renaissance everywhere brought about a break between people of culture and the mass of the population ; but while abstracting culture from national tradition , it did at least cause it to be steeped in Greek tradition . Since then , links with the national traditions have not been renewed , but Greece has been forgotten . The result has been a culture which has developed in a very restricted medium , removed from the world , in a stove-pipe atmosphere—a culture very strongly directed towards and influenced by technical science , very strongly tinged with pragmatism , extremely broken up by specialization , entirely deprived both of contact with this world and , at the same time , of any window opening on to the world beyond . Nowadays a man can belong to so-called cultured circles without , on the one hand , having any sort of conception about human destiny or , on the other hand , being aware , for example , that all the constellations are not visible at all seasons of the year . A lot of people think that a little peasant boy of the present day who goes to primary school knows more than Pythagoras did , simply because he can repeat parrot-wise that the earth moves round the sun . In actual fact , he no longer looks up at the heavens . This sun about which they talk to him in class hasn ’ t , for him , the slightest connexion with the one he can see . He is severed from the universe surrounding him , just as little Polynesians are severed from their past by being forced to repeat : ‘ Our ancestors , the Gauls , had fair hair. ’ What is called today educating the masses , is taking this modern culture , evolved in such a closed , unwholesome atmosphere , and one so indifferent to the truth , removing whatever it may still contain of intrinsic merit—an operation known as popularization—and shovelling the residue as it stands into the minds of the unfortunate individuals desirous of learning , in the same way as you feed birds with a stick . Moreover , the desire to learn for the sake of learning , the desire for truth , has become very rare . The prestige of culture has become almost exclusively a social one , as much for the peasant who dreams of having a schoolteacher son , or the schoolteacher who dreams of having a son at the Ecole Normale Supérieure,1 as for the society people who fawn upon savants and well-known writers . The youth of our schools are as much obsessed by their examinations as our workmen engaged in piece-work are by their pay packets . There is something woefully wrong with the health of a social system , when a peasant tills the soil with the feeling that , if he is a peasant , it is because he wasn ’ t intelligent enough to become a schoolteacher . The mixture of confused and more or less false ideas known under the name of Marxism , a mixture to which , since Marx ’ s day , it is , generally speaking , only very ordinary middle-class intellectuals who have contributed , is also for the working-class a completely outlandish doctrine , which they are incapable of assimilating , and which is , besides , devoid of any nutritive value , for it has been emptied of nearly all the truth contained in Marx ’ s writings . From time to time , a scientific presentation for popular consumption is added . The effect of all this can only be to bring about the most intense uprootedness among the working-class . Uprootedness is by far the most dangerous malady to which human societies are exposed , for it is a self-propagating one . For people who are really uprooted there remain only two possible sorts of behaviour : either to fall into a spiritual lethargy resembling death , like the majority of the slaves in the days of the Roman Empire , or to hurl themselves into some form of activity necessarily designed to uproot , often by the most violent methods , those who are not yet uprooted , or only partly so . The Romans were a handful of fugitives who banded themselves together artificially to form a city , and deprived the Mediterranean peoples of their individual manner of life , their country , traditions , past history to such an extent that posterity has taken them , at their own valuation , for the founders of civilization in these conquered territories . The Hebrews were escaped slaves , and they either exterminated or reduced to servitude all the peoples of Palestine . The Germans , at the time Hitler assumed command over them , were really—as he was never tired of repeating—a nation of proletarians , that is to say , uprooted individuals . The humiliation of 1918 , inflation , overindustrialization and above all the extreme gravity of the unemployment crisis had infected them with the moral disease to the acute point where irresponsibility takes possession . The Spaniards and Englishmen who , from the sixteenth century onwards , massacred or enslaved coloured peoples , were adventurers almost without any contact with the fundamental life of their own respective countries . The same may be said in regard to a part of the French Empire , which moreover was built up at a time when the French tradition was suffering from a decline . Whoever is uprooted himself uproots others . Whoever is rooted himself doesn ’ t uproot others . Under the same name of revolution , and often using identical slogans and subjects for propaganda , lie concealed two conceptions entirely opposed to one another . One consists in transforming society in such a way that the working-class may be given roots in it ; while the other consists in spreading to the whole of society the disease of uprootedness which has been inflicted on the working-class . It must not be said or supposed that the second operation can ever form a prelude to the first ; that is false . They are two opposite roads which do not meet . The second conception is nowadays much more frequently met with than the first , both among militants and among the mass of the workers . It is obvious that it tends more and more to gain ground in proportion as uprootedness continues and increases its ravages . It can easily be realized that , from one day to another , the harm may become irreparable . On the conservative side , a similar ambiguity prevails . A few really want the workers to become rooted again ; only this desire of theirs is accompanied by imaginary pictures most of which , instead of having reference to the future , are borrowed from a past which is , moreover , partly fictitious . The rest want purely and simply to see maintained or reinforced that category of human material to which the proletariat has been reduced . Thus those who really desire the good—and they are not very numerous—weaken their position still further by distributing themselves among two hostile camps with which they have nothing in common . The sudden collapse of France in June 1940 , which surprised every one all over the world , simply showed to what extent the country was uprooted . A tree whose roots are almost entirely eaten away falls at the first blow . If France offered a spectacle more painful than that of any other European country , it is because modern civilization with all its toxins was in a more advanced stage there than elsewhere , with the exception of Germany . But in Germany , uprootedness had taken on an aggressive form , whereas in France it was characterized by inertia and stupor . The difference is due to more or less hidden causes , some of which could no doubt be discovered were one to undertake the necessary search . On the other hand , the country which in face of the first wave of German terror behaved far and away the best , was the one where tradition is strongest and most carefully nurtured , that is to say , England . In France , the uprootedness characterizing the proletariat had reduced vast numbers of workers to a state of apathetic stupor , and caused others to feel themselves at war with society . The same money which had brutally cut away the roots of the working-class , had at the same time gnawed at those of the middle-classes , for wealth is cosmopolitan ; any feeble attachment to the country which these might still retain was very much outweighed , especially since 1936 , by fear and hatred of the workers . Even the peasants had almost become uprooted since the 1914 war , demoralized by the rôle of cannon fodder they had played in it , by money which occupied an increasingly important place in their lives , and by far too frequent a contact with the corruption prevailing in the cities . As for intelligence , it was almost extinct . This general malady throughout the country took the form of a sort of drowsiness , which alone prevented civil war from breaking out . France loathed the war which threatened to prevent her from continuing her sleep . Half stunned by the terrible blow of May and June 1940 , she threw herself into the arms of Pétain in order to be able to continue to sleep with a semblance of security . Since then , enemy oppression has turned this sleep into such a grievous nightmare that she begins to toss about , anxiously awaiting outside help to come and waken her . Under the effects of war , the disease of uprootedness has taken on such a sharp increase throughout Europe as to leave one legitimately appalled . The only thing which seems to offer any hope is this : that suffering will have to a certain extent restored to life memories which were lately almost dead , as in France those of 1789 . As for the Oriental countries , to which during the last few centuries , but especially in the last fifty years , the white man has carried the disease of uprootedness from which they are suffering , Japan gives ample proof of the intensity reached there by the active form of this disease . Indo-China offers an example of its passive form . India , where a living tradition still persists , has been sufficiently contaminated for even those who speak publicly in the name of this tradition to dream nevertheless of building in their land a nation according to the modern Western type . China remains very mysterious . Russia , which is , as always , half-European , half-Oriental , just as much so ; for one can not be sure whether the vigour that is covering her with glory proceeds , as in the case of the Germans , from uprootedness of an active nature , such as the history of the past twenty-five years would first lead one to expect , or whether it is above all a manifestation of the deep-flowing life of the people , going right back to the remotest times , and having remained subterraneously almost intact . As for the American continent , since its population has for several centuries been founded above all on immigration , the dominating influence which it will probably exercise greatly increases the danger . In this almost desperate situation , all we can look to for encouragement here below is in those historical atolls of the living past left upon the surface of the earth . Not that we should approve the fuss started by Mussolini over the Roman Empire , or try to make use of Louis XIV for the same sort of purpose . Conquests are not of life , they are of death at the very moment they take place . It is the distillations from the living past which should be jealously preserved , everywhere , whether it be in Paris or Tahiti , for there are not too many such on the entire globe . It would be useless to turn one ’ s back on the past in order simply to concentrate on the future . It is a dangerous illusion to believe that such a thing is even possible . The opposition of future to past or past to future is absurd . The future brings us nothing , gives us nothing ; it is we who in order to build it have to give it everything , our very life . But to be able to give , one has to possess ; and we possess no other life , no other living sap , than the treasures stored up from the past and digested , assimilated and created afresh by us . Of all the human soul ’ s needs , none is more vital than this one of the past . Love of the past has nothing to do with any reactionary political attitude . Like all human activities , the revolution draws all its vigour from a tradition . Marx felt this so strongly that he was determined to make this tradition go back to the remotest times by making class-war the one and only principle by which to explain history . Up to the very beginning of this century , few things in Europe were closer to the Middle Ages than French trade-unionism , sole reflected ray , with us , of the guild spirit . The feeble remains of this trade-unionism are among the number of embers upon which it is most urgent that we should blow . For several centuries now , men of the white race have everywhere destroyed the past , stupidly , blindly , both at home and abroad . If in certain respects there has been , nevertheless , real progress during this period , it is not because of this frenzy , but in spite of it , under the impulse of what little of the past remained alive . The past once destroyed never returns . The destruction of the past is perhaps the greatest of all crimes . Today the preservation of what little of it remains ought to become almost an obsession . We must put an end to the terrible uprootedness which European colonial methods always produce , even under their least cruel aspects . We must abstain , once victory is ours , from punishing the conquered enemy by uprooting him still further ; seeing that it is neither possible nor desirable to exterminate him , to aggravate his lunacy would be to show oneself more of a lunatic than he . We must also keep , above all , well to the fore in any political , legal or technical innovations likely to have social repercussions , some arrangement whereby human beings may once more be able to recover their roots . This doesn ’ t mean they should be fenced in . On the contrary , never was plenty of fresh air more indispensable . Rooting in and the multiplying of contacts are complementary to one another . For instance , if , wherever technical conditions permit—and as the result of a slight effort in this direction they could easily be made to do so—workmen were dispersed , each one owning his house , a bit of garden and a machine ; and if , on the other hand , the Tour de France2 of former days were revived for the benefit of the young , if necessary on an international scale ; if workmen were frequently given the opportunity of filling in periods of attendance at the assembly shops where the parts they make are combined with all the others , or of going off to help train apprentices ; with , in addition , some satisfactory safeguard in the matter of wages—then the wretchedness of the proletarian lot would disappear . We shall never put an end to the proletarian lot by passing laws , whether these be concerned with the nationalization of key industries , the abolition of private property , powers granted to the trade-unions to negotiate collective agreements , representation by factory delegates or the control of engagement . All the measures that are proposed , be they given a revolutionary or a reformist label , are purely legal , and it is not on a legal plane that working-class distress is situated , nor the remedy for this distress . Marx would perfectly well have understood this if he had been intellectually honest with himself , for it is a truth which bursts forth in the best pages of his Capital . It is no use attempting to discover in the demands put forward by the workers the cure for their misfortune . Plunged in misfortune body and soul , including the imagination , how should they be able to imagine anything which didn ’ t bear misfortune ’ s mark ? If they make a violent effort to extricate themselves therefrom , they fall into apocalyptic reverie , or seek compensation in a working-class imperialism which is no more to be encouraged than a national imperialism . What one can look out for in their demands is the sign and token of their sufferings . Now , all , or nearly all , of these demands express the suffering caused by uprootedness . If they want control of engagement and nationalization , it is because they are obsessed by the fear of total uprootedness—that is , of unemployment . If they want the abolition of private property , it is because they have had enough of being admitted into wherever it is they work as immigrants allowed to enter on sufferance . This was also the psychological mainspring behind the workers ’ occupation of the factories in June 1936 . For some days they experienced a pure , unmixed joy at finding themselves at home there where they spent their working-day ; the joy of a child who doesn ’ t want to think of tomorrow . Nobody could reasonably expect that tomorrow was going to be a particularly happy one . The French working-class movement which came out of the Revolution was essentially a cry , less one of revolt than one of protest , in face of the pitiless hardship of the lot reserved for all the oppressed . Considering what can be expected from any kind of collective movement , this one certainly contained a relatively very high degree of purity of motive . It came to an end in 1914 ; ever since , there have been only echoes of it , the toxins generated by society in general having even corrupted the sense of misfortune . We must endeavour to recover its tradition ; but nobody could wish to see it revived . However beautiful the sound of a cry of woe may be , one can not wish to hear it again ; it is more human to wish to cure the woe . The actual list of workmen ’ s woes supplies us with a list of the things that need changing . First of all , we must do away with the shock experienced by a lad who at twelve or thirteen leaves school and enters a factory . There are some workmen who could feel happy enough , had this shock not left behind it an ever-open wound ; but they don ’ t realize themselves that their suffering comes to them from the past . The child while at school , whether a good or a bad pupil , was a being whose existence was recognized , whose development was a matter of concern , whose best motives were appealed to . From one day to the next , he finds himself an extra cog in a machine , rather less than a thing , and nobody cares any more whether he obeys from the lowest motives or not , provided he obeys . The majority of workmen have at any rate at this stage of their lives experienced the sensation of no longer existing , accompanied by a sort of inner vertigo , such as intellectuals or bourgeois , even in their greatest sufferings , have very rarely had the opportunity of knowing . This first shock , received at so early an age , often leaves an indelible mark . It can rule out all love of work once and for all . We must change the system concerning concentration of attention during working hours , the type of stimulants which make for the overcoming of laziness or exhaustion—and which at present are merely fear and extra pay—the type of obedience necessary , the far too small amount of initiative , skill and thought demanded of workmen , their present exclusion from any imaginative share in the work of the enterprise as a whole , their sometimes total ignorance of the value , social utility and destination of the things they manufacture , and the complete divorce between working life and family life . The list could well be extended . Apart from the desire for reforms , three sorts of factors come into play in the process of production : technical , economic and military ones . Nowadays , the importance of the military factors in production corresponds to that of production itself in the conduct of war ; in other words , it is very considerable . From the military point of view , the crowding together of thousands of workmen into vast industrial prisons where the really qualified ones form a tiny minority is doubly absurd . Modern military conditions require , first , that industrial production should be dispersed ; secondly , that the majority of workmen in peacetime should consist of trained professionals , under whose orders can be placed immediately , in an international crisis or during a war , a host of women , boys and old men , so as to increase at once the volume of production . Nothing helped so much to paralyse British war production for so long as the lack of qualified workmen . But since it is impossible to have highly qualified professionals performing the work of machine-minders , this latter function must be done away with , save in time of war . It so rarely happens that military requirements are in accordance , and not in contradiction , with the best human aspirations , that advantage ought to be taken of the fact . From the technical point of view , the relative ease with which energy can be transmitted in the form of electricity certainly makes a high degree of decentralization possible . As for the machines , they are not yet right for a transformation in the system of production ; but the examples provided by adjustable automatic machines already in use would no doubt make it possible to effect such a transformation by dint of an effort , if the effort could only be made . Speaking in general terms , a reform of an infinitely greater social importance than all the measures arrayed under the title of Socialism would be a transformation in the very conception of technical research . So far , no one has ever imagined that an engineer occupied in technical research on new types of machinery could have anything other than the following double objective in view : first , to increase the profits of the firm which has ordered the research , and secondly , to serve the interests of the consumer . For in such a case , when we talk about the interests of production , we mean producing more and at a cheaper rate ; that is to say , these interests are really identical with those of the consumer . Thus , these two words are constantly being used the one for the other . As for the workmen who will be spending their energies on this machine , nobody thinks twice about them . Nobody even thinks it possible to think about them . The most that ever happens is that from time to time some vague security apparatus is provided , although , in fact , severed fingers and factory stairs daily splashed with fresh human blood are such a common feature . But this feeble show of interest is the only one . Not only does nobody consider the moral well-being of the workmen , which would demand too great an effort of the imagination ; but nobody even considers the possibility of not injuring them in the flesh . Otherwise one might perhaps have found something else for the mines than that appalling automatic drill worked by compressed air , which sends an uninterrupted series of shocks for eight hours through the body of the man manipulating it . No one thinks either of asking himself whether some new type of machine , by making capital less fluid and production more rigid , will not aggravate the general danger of unemployment . What is the use of workmen obtaining as a result of their struggles an increase in wages and a relaxation of discipline , if meanwhile engineers in a few research departments invent , without the slightest evil intent , machines which reduce their souls and bodies to a state of exhaustion , or aggravate their economic difficulties ? What use can the partial or total nationalization of economic production be to them , if the spirit of these research departments hasn ’ t changed ? And so far , as far as one can tell , it hasn ’ t changed in places where nationalization has been introduced . Even Soviet propaganda has never claimed that Russia had discovered a radically new type of machine , worthy of being handled by an all-powerful proletariat . And yet , if there is one conviction which stands out with irresistible force in the works of Marx , it is this one : that any change in the relationship between the classes must remain a pure illusion , if it be not accompanied by a transformation in technical processes , expressing itself in entirely new types of machinery . From the workman ’ s point of view , a machine needs to possess three qualities . First , it should be able to be worked without exhausting the muscles , or the nerves , or any organ whatever—and also without cutting or lacerating the flesh , save under very exceptional circumstances . Secondly , in relation to the general danger of unemployment , the productive apparatus as a whole should be as flexible as possible , so as to be able to follow the fluctuations in demand . Consequently , the same machine ought to serve a variety of purposes , the more the better , and even to a certain extent indeterminate ones . This also forms a military requirement , for the greater ease in transferring from a peacetime to a wartime footing . Lastly , it is a factor which makes for happiness during working-hours , for it is thus possible to avoid that monotony so much feared by workmen because of the boredom and disgust it engenders . Thirdly , it should normally be in keeping with the work of which a fully qualified man is capable . This again is a military necessity , and it is , furthermore , indispensable to the dignity and moral well-being of the workmen . A working-class composed almost entirely of competent professionals is not a proletariat . A considerable development of the adjustable automatic machine , serving a variety of purposes , would go far to satisfy these needs . The first models of this type are already in existence , and it is certain that in this direction lie very great possibilities . Such machines make the work of a machine-minder obsolete . In a huge concern like Renault , few of the workmen look happy as they stand at work ; amongst these few privileged beings are those in charge of automatic turrets with movable cam adjustment . But what is essential is the idea itself of posing in technical terms problems concerning the effect of machines upon the moral well-being of the workmen . Once posed , the technicians have only to resolve them ; just as they have resolved countless others . All that is necessary is that they should want to do so . For this reason , the places where new machinery is devised should no longer fall entirely within the network of capitalist interests . It would be natural for the State to exercise some control over them by means of grants . And why shouldn ’ t the workers ’ organizations do the same by giving bonuses ? —without mentioning other means of bringing influence and pressure to bear . If the workers ’ unions could become really alive , they would be in perpetual contact with the research departments where new technical processes were being studied . Such a contact could be prepared in advance by fomenting a sympathetic atmosphere towards workmen in engineering schools . Up to now , technicians have never had anything else in mind than the requirements of manufacture . If they were to start having always present before them the needs of those who do the manufacturing , the whole technique of production would be slowly transformed . This ought to become a part of the instruction given in engineering schools and technical schools generally—but a part with some real substance to it . There would no doubt be everything to be gained in putting in hand right away investigations concerning this type of problem . The subject of such investigations would be easy enough to define . A pope once said : ‘ Material comes out of the factory ennobled , the workers come out of it debased. ’ Marx made exactly the same observation in still more vigorous terms . What is wanted is that all those who endeavour to carry out technical improvements should have continually present in their minds the conviction that among all the deficiencies of all kinds it is possible to detect in the present state of manufacturing , the one for which it is by far the most indispensably urgent to find a remedy is this one : that nothing must be done to make it worse ; that everything must be done to make it less . This conception should henceforth form part of the sense of professional obligation , the sense of professional honour , with whosoever holds a responsible position in industry . One of the principal tasks before the workmen ’ s trade-unions , if they were capable of carrying it out , would be to make this conception sink deep into the universal consciousness . If the majority of workmen were highly qualified professionals , fairly frequently called upon to show inventiveness and initiative , each responsible for his production and machine , the present discipline in regard to work would no longer serve any useful purpose . Some men could work at home ; others in small workshops , which could very often be organized on a co-operative basis . At present , the rule of authority is exercised in an even more intolerable fashion in small factories than in large ones ; but that is because they try to imitate the large ones . Such workshops would not be small factories , they would be industrial organisms of a new kind , in which a new spirit could blow ; though small , they would be bound together by organic ties strong enough to enable them to form as a whole a large concern . There is about large concerns , in spite of all their defects , a special sort of poetry , and one for which workmen have nowadays acquired a taste . Payment by the piece would no longer hold any disadvantages , once the herding of the workers into prison-like structures had been abolished . It would no longer involve that obsession with speed at all costs . It would constitute the normal mode of remuneration for work freely carried out . Nor would obedience be any longer a matter of uninterrupted submissiveness . A workman or a group of workmen could have a certain number of orders to fulfil within a given time , and be left with a completely free hand in the actual layout of the work . It would be a different thing altogether from knowing that one had to go on repeating indefinitely the same movement , in obedience to an order , until the precise second when a new command came to impose a different movement for an equally unknown length of time . There is a certain relation to time which suits inert matter , and another sort of relation which suits thinking beings . It is a mistake to confuse the two . Whether on a co-operative basis or not , these little workshops would at any rate not be like prisons . A workman would be able now and again to show his wife where he works and his machine , as they were all so happy to do in June 1936 , taking advantage of the occupation of the factories . The children would come along , after school , to join their father and learn how to work , at an age when work is by far the most exciting of all games . Thus , later on , when they came to start their apprenticeship , they would already be almost qualified in one trade , and could , according to their choice , perfect themselves in that particular one or acquire a second one . Work would be lit up by poetry for the rest of their lives by these wonders experienced in infancy , instead of wearing throughout life the gloomy aspect of a nightmare , simply because of the shock received on initiation . If , even in the midst of the present demoralization , the peasants have far less need than the workmen of being continually goaded to activity by stimulants , the reason lies perhaps in this difference . A child can already find himself unhappy on a farm at the age of nine or ten ; but nearly always there will have been a time when work was for him a marvellous game , reserved for the grown-ups . If workmen , in their majority , could become reasonably happy , several seemingly essential and burning problems would not only be resolved but actually abolished . Without their having been resolved , people would forget that they had ever existed . Distress is a culture broth for false problems . It creates obsessions . The way to appease them is not to provide what they insist upon , but to bring about the disappearance of the distress . If a man is thirsty because of a wound in the stomach , drink is not what he requires , but to have his wound cured . Unfortunately it is only the future of the young which can be changed . A great effort will have to be made in order to train working-class youth , and particularly in connexion with apprenticeship . The State will be obliged to take over the responsibility , because there is no other social entity capable of doing so . Nothing demonstrates more clearly the essential failure of the capitalist class than the negligence shown by employers in the matter of apprenticeship . It is the sort which in Russia is termed criminal negligence . It would be impossible to insist too much on this point , to bring too much before the public notice this simple truth , easily grasped , incontrovertible . Employers have , during the past twenty or thirty years , forgotten to think about the training of sound professional workmen . The lack of qualified workmen contributed as much as any other single factor to the country ’ s downfall . Even in 1934 and 1935 , when the unemployment crisis had reached its height , when production was at dead-point , engineering and aviation works were looking for good professional workmen and couldn ’ t find them . The workmen complained that the tests were too difficult ; but it was they who hadn ’ t received the necessary training so as to be able to carry out the tests . How , under such conditions , would it have been possible for us to have had sufficient arms ? But , besides , even without a war , the lack of professionally trained men , becoming more serious as the years went by , was bound to end up by rendering economic life itself impossible . Once and for all , the whole country and the interested parties themselves must be told that the employers showed themselves , in fact , incapable of shouldering the responsibilities which the capitalist system imposes on them . They have a function to fill , but it is not that one , for experience has shown that that one is too heavy and too vast for them . Once that has been thoroughly understood , we shall no longer be afraid of them , and they , for their part , will cease to oppose necessary reforms ; they will stay within the modest limits of their natural function . That is their only chance of survival . It is because people are afraid of them that they so often think of getting rid of them . They would say a workman didn ’ t know how to look ahead if they caught sight of him taking an aperitive ; but their own common sense didn ’ t extend to the point of looking far enough ahead to see that if no apprentices were trained , in twenty years ’ time there would no longer be any workmen , at least any deserving the name . Seemingly they are incapable of looking more than two or three years ahead . Doubtless , too , they were secretly inclined to prefer to have in their factories a drove of unfortunates , rootless individuals without the least claim to any sort of consideration . They didn ’ t know that , though the submissiveness of slaves is greater than that of free men , their revolt is also a far more terrible one . They have had a certain experience of this , but without understanding what it was all about . The lack of interest displayed by the workers ’ trade-unions in this matter of apprenticeship is just as scandalous from another point of view . They hadn ’ t to concern themselves with questions of future production ; but since their only title to existence lay in the defence of justice , they ought to have been moved to pity by the moral distress of the youngsters . In actual fact , the really wretched part of the factory population—the youths , women , immigrant workers , whether foreign or colonial—was abandoned to its wretchedness . The lump sum of all their sufferings counted for far less in trade-union circles than the problem of salary increases for categories of workmen already amply paid . Nothing illustrates more clearly how difficult it is for any collective movement to be really set in the way of justice , and for the unfortunate to be really protected . They are unable to protect themselves , because they are prevented by misfortune ; and they are not protected from the outside , because it is the tendency of human nature not to pay any attention to those in misfortune . The J.O.C.3 alone has concerned itself with the distress among youthful workers , the existence of such an organization being perhaps the only sure sign that Christianity is not dead in us . Just as the capitalists have betrayed their calling by criminally neglecting not only the interests of the people , not only those of the nation , but even their own ; so the workers ’ trade-unions have betrayed theirs by neglecting to protect the wretched ones among their ranks , in order to turn their attention to the defence of special interests . It is just as well that this should be known , too , in case the day should ever come when they found themselves in the position and under the temptation to commit abuses of power . Putting the curb on the trade-unions , transformed into single , compulsory organizations , was the natural and inevitable outcome of this change of spirit . In reality , the Vichy Government ’ s action in this matter has been negligible . The C.G.T.4 has not suffered rape at its hands . For some time now , the state of the latter has not been such as to make anything of the kind any longer possible . The State is not particularly well qualified to take over the defence of the unfortunate . It is even wellnigh incapable of doing so , unless obliged to by some clear and urgent necessity in the public interest , and by a movement of opinion . As far as the training of working-class youth is concerned , such a necessity in the public interest could not be clearer or more urgent . As for the movement of opinion , it must be created , and a beginning made now , by using the nuclei of genuine trade-union bodies , the J.O.C. , research groups and youth movements , even official ones . In Russia , the Bolsheviks have roused the enthusiasm of their people by proposing to them the building up of a vast industry . Couldn ’ t we likewise rouse our own people ’ s enthusiasm by proposing to them the building up of an industrial population of a new type ? Such an objective would be well in accord with the French genius . The training of an industrial youth should go beyond a purely professional training . It should , of course , admit of an education , like the training of any kind of youth ; and for that reason it is desirable that the apprenticeship should not be done in the schools , where it is always badly done , but should be bathed right away in an atmosphere of production itself . At the same time , it can not be allowed to be carried out in factories either . The subject requires the display of some inventiveness . Something is needed which combines the advantages of a training-school , those of apprenticeship in a factory , those of a chantier de jeunesse5 on the present model , and many more besides . But the training of an industrial youth , especially in a country like France , involves also access to a general education , a participation in an intellectual culture . They must be made to feel at home , too , in the world of thought . What form is this participation to take ? And what is this culture to be ? That is a dispute which has been going on for a long time . At one time , in certain circles , people used to talk a lot about working-class culture . Others used to say there was no such thing as working-class or non-working-class culture , but just plain culture . The effect of the latter observation has been , on the whole , to cause the same treatment to be meted out to the most intelligent workmen and the ones most anxious to learn as is reserved for semi-imbecile boys in a lycée . Things have sometimes turned out somewhat better than that ; but , by and large , that represents accurately enough the principle of vulgarization as it is understood at the present time . The term is as atrocious as the thing itself . When we have something reasonably satisfactory to denote , we shall have to think of another term . Certainly , truth is one , but error is manifold ; and in every culture , save in the case of the perfect one , which for Man can only constitute an extreme case , there is a mixture of truth and error . If our culture were close to perfection , it would be situated above the social classes . But since it is a mediocre culture , it is to a large extent one for middle-class intellectuals , and more especially , for some time now , one for intellectual government employees . If one wanted to pursue the analysis in this direction , one would find that in some of Marx ’ s ideas there is far more of truth than appears at first sight ; but we need not expect Marxists themselves ever to go in for such an analysis ; for they would first of all have to look at themselves in a mirror , which would be too painful an operation , and one for which the specifically Christian virtues alone are able to supply the necessary courage . What makes it so difficult for our culture to be communicated to the people is not that it is too high , but that it is too low . We apply a strange remedy , indeed , by lowering it still further before distributing it to them in little doses . There are two obstacles which make the people ’ s access to culture a difficult matter . One is the lack of time and energy . The people have little leisure to devote to intellectual effort ; and fatigue sets a limit to the intensity of such effort . That particular obstacle is quite unimportant . At least , it would be so , if we didn ’ t make the mistake of attributing importance to it . Truth lights up the soul in proportion to its purity , not in any sense to its quantity . It isn ’ t the quantity of metal which matters , but the degree of alloy . In this respect , a little pure gold is worth a lot of pure gold . A little pure truth is worth as much as a lot of pure truth . Similarly , one perfect Greek statue contains as much beauty as two perfect Greek statues . Niobe ’ s sin consisted in disregarding the fact that quantity has nothing to do with virtue , and she was punished for it by the death of her children . We commit the same sin every day , and are punished for it in the same way . If a workman , in the course of a year ’ s eager and persevering efforts , manages to learn a few geometrical theorems , as much truth will have entered into his soul as in that of a student who , during the same period , has shown a corresponding ardour in assimilating a portion of higher mathematics . It is true that such a thing is scarcely believable , and would perhaps not be easy to prove . But for Christians at least it should be an article of faith , if they were to remind themselves that truth is amongst the number of pure blessings which the Gospel compares to bread , and that whoever asks for bread isn ’ t given a stone . Material obstacles—want of leisure , fatigue , lack of aptitude , sickness , physical pain—hinder the acquisition of the inferior or more ordinary elements of culture , not that of the most precious treasures it contains . The second obstacle to working-class culture is that to the workman ’ s social condition , as to any other kind , there corresponds a certain particular disposition of feeling . Consequently , there is something outlandish about what has been elaborated by other people and for other people . The cure for that consists in an effort of translation ; not of popularization , but of translation , which is a very different matter . It isn ’ t a question of taking truths—of already far too poor a quality—contained in the culture of the intellectuals , and then degrading them , mutilating them and destroying all their flavour ; but simply of expressing them , in all their fullness , in a language which , to use Pascal ’ s expression , makes them perceptible to the heart , for the benefit of people whose feelings have been shaped by working-class conditions . The art of transposing truths is one of the most essential and the least known . What makes it difficult is that , in order to practise it , one has to have placed oneself at the centre of a truth and possessed it in all its nakedness , behind the particular form in which it happens to have found expression . Furthermore , transposition is a criterion of truth . A truth which can not be transposed isn ’ t a truth ; in the same way that what doesn ’ t change in appearance according to the point of view isn ’ t a real object , but a deceptive representation of such . In the mind , too , there is three-dimensional space . The search for modes of transposition suitable for transmitting culture to the people would be very much more salutary still for culture than for the people . It would constitute an extremely precious stimulant for the former , which would in this way emerge from the appallingly stuffy atmosphere in which it is confined , and cease being merely something of interest to specialists . For that is all it is at present—a thing for specialists , from top to bottom , only more degraded the nearer you approach the bottom . Just as the workmen are treated as though they were rather stupid secondary schoolboys , so the secondary schoolboys are treated as though they were extremely tired students , and the students as though they were professional teachers suffering from amnesia and requiring to be reeducated . Culture—as we know it—is an instrument manipulated by teachers for manufacturing more teachers , who , in their turn , will manufacture still more teachers . Amidst all the present forms of the uprooting malady , the uprooting of culture is not the least alarming . The first consequence of this malady , equally affecting all spheres , is generally that , relations being cut , each thing is looked upon as an end in itself . Uprooting breeds idolatry . To take but one example of the deformation of our culture . The concern—a perfectly legitimate one—to preserve for geometrical reasoning its character of necessity , causes geometry to be presented to lycée boys as something without any relation at all to the outside world . The only interest they can take in it is as in some game , or else in order to get good marks . How could they be expected to see any truth in it ? The majority of them will always remain ignorant of the fact that nearly all our actions , the simple ones as well as the judiciously combined ones , are applications of geometrical principles ; that the universe we inhabit is a network of geometrical relations , and that it is to geometrical necessity that we are in fact bound , as creatures enclosed in space and time . This geometrical necessity is presented to them in such a way that it appears arbitrary . Could anything be more absurd than an arbitrary necessity ? By definition , necessity is something which is imposed . On the other hand , when it is sought to popularize geometry and relate it to experience , the demonstrations are omitted . All that remains then is a few formulae totally devoid of interest . Geometry has then lost its savour , its very essence . For its essence lies in being a branch of study devoted to the subject of necessity—that same necessity which is sovereign in this material world . Both these deformations could be easily avoided . There is no need to choose between demonstration and experience . It is as easy to demonstrate with some wood or iron as it is with a piece of chalk . There is quite a simple way in which geometrical necessity could be introduced into training-schools , by associating theoretical study and the workshop . One would say to the children : ‘ Here are a certain number of tasks to be carried out ( constructing objects fulfilling such and such requirements ) . Some of them are possible , others impossible . Carry out the ones that are possible , and as regards the ones you don ’ t carry out , you must be able to force me to admit that they are impossible. ’ Through this crack , the whole of geometry can be made to pass into the sphere of practical work . Execution is a sufficient empirical proof of the possible ; but as for the impossible , there is no empirical proof , and a demonstration is necessary . The impossible is necessity in its concrete shape . As for the rest of Science , everything that belongs to standard Science—one can not make Einstein and the quantum theory a part of working-class culture—is derived principally from an analogical method , consisting in transporting into the realm of nature the relations which govern human labour . Consequently , it is far more a natural concern of the workers , if one knows how to present it to them properly , than it is of secondary schoolboys . This is even truer in the case of that branch of culture which comes under the title of ‘ Letters ’ . For the subject dealt with is always the human condition , and it is the people which has the truest , most direct experience of what this human condition is . On the whole , and saving exceptions , second-class works and below are most suitable for the élite , and absolutely first-class works most suitable for the people . For example , what an intensity of understanding could spring up from contact between the people and Greek poetry , the almost unique theme of which is misfortune ! Only , one would have to know how to translate and present it . A workman , for instance , who bears the anguish of unemployment deep in the very marrow of his bones , would understand the feelings of Philoctetus when his bow is taken away from him , and the despair with which he stares at his powerless hands . He would also understand that Electra is hungry , which a bourgeois , except just at present , is absolutely incapable of understanding—including the publishers of the Budé Library.6 There is a third obstacle to working-class culture ; that is slavery . The mind is essentially free and sovereign when it is really and truly exercised . To be free and sovereign , as a thinking being , for one hour or two , and a slave for the rest of the day , is such an agonizing spiritual quartering that it is almost impossible not to renounce , so as to escape it , the highest forms of thought . If effective reforms were to be introduced , this obstacle would gradually disappear . Nay more , the memory of the recent state of slavery and the remains of it in process of disappearing would act as a powerful stimulant to the mind during the period of liberation . A condition of any working-class culture is the mingling of what are called ‘ intellectuals ’ —an awful name , but at present they scarcely deserve a better one—with the workers . It is difficult to make something real out of such a mingling . However , the present situation provides an opportunity . Large numbers of young intellectuals have been driven into slavery to work in the factories and fields of Germany . Others have mixed with young workmen in the camps de compagnons.7 But it is , above all , the former who have had a vital experience . Many have doubtless succumbed to it , or at any rate been too physically and spiritually weakened by it . Still , there may be some who will emerge having really profited therefrom . This extremely valuable experience runs the risk of being wasted , due to the almost irresistible temptation to forget humiliation and misfortune as soon as one has left them behind . Now , straightaway , those among such prisoners who have returned should be approached and asked to keep up their contacts with the workers which had been begun by force , think over for themselves what this recent experience has meant , with the idea of effecting a rapprochement between culture and the people , thereby giving culture a new direction . The trade-union Resistance organizations could at the present time be the means of effecting such a rapprochement . But , generally speaking , if the things of the mind are to play their proper part in the workers ’ unions , the latter will have to have other contacts with the intellectual than those merely consisting in grouping these together in the C.G.T.8 in professional organizations for the defence of their own material interests . That was the height of absurdity . A natural relationship would be one whereby a union welcomed as honorary members , but without any right to intervene in discussions on the subject of action , a few intellectuals who would place themselves voluntarily at its disposal for organizing courses of instruction and libraries . It would be highly desirable for a movement to start amongst the generation which , thanks to its immaturity , has avoided being mixed with the workers under the compulsion of captivity , similar to the one which swept through Russian students fifty years ago , but with clearer objectives , and for students to go and spend voluntary and longish periods as workmen anonymously confounded with the mass , both in field and factory . To sum up , the abolition of the proletarian lot , chiefly characterized by uprootedness , depends upon the creation of forms of industrial production and culture of the mind in which workmen can be , and be made to feel themselves to be , at home . Of course , in any such reconstruction , a major part would have to be played by the workmen themselves . But , in the nature of things , this part would go on increasing in proportion as their actual liberation began to take effect . Inevitably , only the minimum participation can be expected of them whilst they remain in the grip of distress . This problem of the building of entirely new working-class conditions of existence is an urgent one , and needs to be examined without delay . A policy should at once be decided upon . For as soon as the war is over , we shall be busy building in the literal sense of the word—that is , constructing houses , buildings . What is built this time will not be demolished again , unless there is another war , and life will become adapted to it . It would be paradoxical if the stones which will , maybe for several generations , determine the whole of our social life , were allowed to be thrown together just anyhow . For this reason , we shall have to have a clear idea beforehand of the form industrial enterprise is to take in the immediate future . If by any chance we failed to face up to this necessity , through fear of possible divisions in our midst , this would merely mean that we were not qualified to take a hand in shaping the destinies of France . It is urgent , therefore , to consider a plan for re-establishing the working-class by the roots . Tentative proposals for such are summarized below . Large factories would be abolished . A big concern would be composed of an assembly shop connected with a number of little workshops , each containing one or more workmen , dispersed throughout the country . It would be these same workmen , and not specialists , who would take it in turns to go and work for a time in the central assembly shop , and there ought to be a holiday atmosphere about such occasions . Only half a day ’ s work would be required , the rest of the time being taken up with hob-nobbing with others similarly engaged , the development of feelings of loyalty to the concern , technical demonstrations showing each workman the exact function of the parts he makes and the various difficulties overcome by the work of others , geography lectures pointing out where the products they help to manufacture go to , the sort of human beings who use them , and the type of social surroundings , daily existence or human atmosphere in which these products have a part to play , and how big this part is . To this could be added general cultural information . A workman ’ s university would be in the vicinity of each central assembly shop . It would act in close liaison with the management of the concern , but would not form part of the latter ’ s property . The machines would not belong to the concern . They would belong to the minute workshops scattered about everywhere , and these would , in their turn , be the property of the workmen , either individually or collectively . Every workman would , besides , own a house and a bit of land . This triple proprietorship comprising machine , house and land would be bestowed on him by the State as a gift on his marriage , and provided he had successfully passed a difficult technical examination , accompanied by a test to check the level of his intelligence and general culture . The choice of a machine would be made to depend in the first place on the individual workman ’ s tastes and natural abilities , and secondly on very general requirements from the point of view of production . It should be , of course , as far as possible , an adjustable automatic machine with a variety of uses . This triple proprietorship could be neither transmitted by inheritance , nor sold , nor alienated in any way whatever . ( The machine alone could , under certain circumstances , be exchanged . ) The individual having the use of it would only be able to relinquish it purely and simply . In that event , it should be made difficult , but not impossible , for him later on to obtain an equivalent one elsewhere . On a workman ’ s death , this property would return to the State , which would , of course , if need be , be bound to maintain the well-being of the wife and children at the same level as before . If the woman was capable of doing the work , she could keep the property . All such gifts would be financed out of taxes , either levied directly on business profits or indirectly on the sale of business products . They would be administered by a board composed of government officials , owners of business undertakings , trade-unionists and representatives of the Chamber of Deputies . This right to property could be withdrawn on account of professional incapacity after sentence by a court of law . This , of course , presupposes the adoption of analogous penal measures for punishing , if necessary , professional incapacity on the part of the owner of a business undertaking . A workman who wanted to become the owner of a small workshop would first have to obtain permission from a professional organization authorized to grant the same with discretion , and would then be given facilities for the purchase of two or three extra machines ; but no more than that . A workman unable to pass the technical examination would remain in the position of a wage-earner . But he would be able throughout the whole of his life , at whatever age , to make fresh attempts to satisfy the conditions . He would also at any age , and on several occasions , be able to ask to be sent on a free course of some months at a training-school . These wage-earners through incapacity would work either in little workshops not run on a co-operative basis , as assistants to a man working on his own , or as hands in the assembly shops . But only a small number of them should be allowed to stay in industry . The majority should be sent to fill jobs as manual labourers and pen-pushers , which are indispensable to the carrying on of the public services and trade . Up to the time he gets married and settles down somewhere for the remainder of his life—that is to say , depending on the individual character , up to the age of twenty-two , twenty-five or thirty—a young man would be regarded as being still in a state of apprenticeship . During childhood , enough time should be left out of school to enable children to spend many , many hours pottering about in their father ’ s company whilst at work . Semi-attendance at school—a few hours ’ study followed by a few hours ’ work—should then go on for some considerable time . Later , a very varied existence is what is needed : journeys of the Tour de France9 type , working courses spent , now with artisans working on their own , now in little co-operative workshops , now in assembly shops belonging to different concerns , now in youth associations of the Chantiers or Compagnons10 type ; working courses which , according to individual tastes and capacities , could be several times repeated and further prolonged by attendance at workmen ’ s colleges for periods varying between a few weeks and two years . The ability to go on such working courses should , moreover , under certain conditions , be made possible at any age . They should be entirely free of charge , and not carry with them any sort of social advantages . When the young workman , gorged and glutted with variety , began to think of settling down , he would be ripe for planting his roots . A wife , children , a garden supplying him with a great part of his food , work associating him with an enterprise he could love , be proud of , and which was to him as a window opened wide on to the outside world—all this is surely enough for the earthly happiness of any human being . Naturally , such a conception of the young working-man ’ s development implies a complete recasting of the present prisonlike system . As for wages , it would be necessary to avoid , in the first place , of course , that they were so low as to cause actual distress—though there would scarcely be any fear of that under such conditions—since they absorb the workman ’ s attention and prevent his attachment to the concern . Corporative bodies , for purposes of arbitration , etc. , ought to be created solely with this purpose in view : to function in such a way that no workman has hardly ever to think about money matters . The profession of manager , like that of medical practitioner , is one whose practice the State , acting in the public interest , should license only after certain conditions have been fulfilled . Such conditions should concern not only capacity , but also moral character . Capital sums involved would be much smaller than at present . A credit system could easily make it possible for any young man without capital who had the necessary capacity and vocation for such a post to become a manager . Business enterprise could thus be made again an individual thing . As for incorporated joint-stock companies , perhaps it would be just as well , while arranging for a suitable method of transition , to abolish them and declare them illegal . Naturally , the variety of business undertakings would involve the consideration of very varied forms of administration . The plan sketched here is only presented as the final stage reached after long efforts , amongst which advances in technical invention would be indispensable . At all events , such a form of social existence would be neither capitalist nor socialist . It would put an end to the proletarian condition , whereas what is called Socialism tends , in fact , to force everybody without distinction into that condition . Its goal would be , not , according to the expression now inclined to become popular , the interest of the consumer—such an interest can only be a grossly material one—but Man ’ s dignity in his work , which is a value of a spiritual order . The difficulty about such a social conception is that there is no possible chance of its emerging from the domain of theory unless a certain number of men can be found who are fired by a burning and unquenchable resolve to make it a reality . It is not at all certain that such men can be found or called into being . Yet , otherwise , it really seems the only choice left is one between different , and almost equally abominable , forms of wretchedness . Although such a conception can only become a reality over a long period of time , post-war reconstruction should at once adopt as its rule the dispersion of industrial activity . UPROOTEDNESS IN THE COUNTRYSIDE The problem of uprootedness in the countryside is no less serious than that of uprootedness in the towns . Although the disease is not so far advanced , there is something even more shocking about it ; for it is contrary to nature that the land should be cultivated by uprooted individuals . Both problems require , therefore , to receive equal attention . Besides , one should never bestow any public mark of attention on industrial workers , without bestowing another one of corresponding importance on the peasants . For they are ever ready to take offence , very susceptible , and always tortured by the thought that they are being forgotten . It is certain that amidst all this present suffering , they find comfort in the assurance that they are being thought about . It must be admitted that we think much more about them when we are hungry than when we have all we want to eat ; and that is so even in the case of people who imagined they had placed their thoughts on a level very much above that of all ordinary physical needs . Workmen have a tendency which ought not to be encouraged to think that , when one refers to the ‘ people ’ , one is necessarily referring solely to them . There is not the slightest justification for this ; unless one chooses to regard as such the fact that they kick up far more of a noise than the peasants . They have succeeded in convincing , in regard to this point , the intellectuals who display an interest in the people . The result has been among the peasants a sort of hatred for what is politically known as the Left , except in places where they have fallen under communist influence , or where anti-clericalism is the ruling passion ; and doubtless in a few other cases besides . In France , the opposition between peasants and workmen goes a long way back . In a complaint made at the end of the fourteenth century , the peasants enumerated in heart-rending accents the cruelties they were made to suffer at the hands of all classes of society , including the artisans . In the history of popular movements in France , it has hardly ever happened , unless I am mistaken , that peasants and workmen have been found on the same side . Even in 1789 , it was doubtless more of a coincidence than anything else . In the fourteenth century , the peasants were far and away the most wretched among the population . But even when they are materially better off—and when such is the case , they scarcely ever realize it , because the workmen who come to spend a few days ’ holiday in the village can not resist the temptation to boast—they are always tortured by the feeling that everything worth while happens in the towns , and that they are ‘ out of it ’ .11 Naturally , this state of mind is aggravated by the setting up of the wireless and cinemas in the villages , and by the sale of newspapers like Confidences and Marie-Claire,12 compared with which cocaine is a harmless product . Such being the situation , one must first invent and then put into execution something which will henceforth give the peasants the feeling that they are ‘ in it ’ .13 It is perhaps a pity that in the broadcasts officially made over the London wireless , the workmen have always been referred to much more than the peasants . It is true that their part in the Resistance is a far , far smaller one . But this is possibly an additional reason for giving repeated proofs that one is aware of their existence . It must be borne in mind that you can not say the French people are behind a movement if this is not true of the majority of the peasants . One should make it a rule never to promise new and better things to the workmen , without at the same time promising as much to the peasants . The great cunning shown by the Nazi Party before 1933 consisted in presenting itself to the workmen as a specifically working-class party , to the peasants as a specifically peasant one , to the lower middle-class as a specifically lower middle-class one , etc . That was easy enough for it to do , as it lied to everybody . We ought to do as much , but without lying to anybody . It isn ’ t easy , but it isn ’ t impossible . Peasant uprootedness has been , over the course of the last few years , as mortal a danger for the country as working-class uprootedness . One of the most serious symptoms was , seven or eight years ago , the desertion of the land in the very middle of an unemployment crisis . It is obvious that a depopulation of the countryside leads , finally , to social death . We can say it will not reach that point . But still , we don ’ t know that it won ’ t . So far , there seems to be nothing which is likely to arrest it . With regard to this phenomenon , two things require to be noted . The first is that the white man carries it about with him wherever he goes . The disease has even penetrated into the heart of the African continent , which had for thousands of years , nevertheless , been made up of villages . These black people at any rate , when nobody came to massacre them , torture them , or reduce them to slavery , knew how to live happily on their land . Contact with us is making them lose the art . That ought to make us wonder whether even the black man , although the most primitive of all colonized peoples , hadn ’ t after all more to teach us than to learn from us . The benefits we have conferred on them resemble the one conferred by the financier on the shoemaker.14 Nothing in the world can make up for the loss of joy in one ’ s work . The second thing to be noted is that the apparently unlimited powers of the totalitarian State are unavailing against this evil . In Germany , formal and official admissions of failure have been made over and over again regarding this matter . In one way , that is all to the good , since it gives us the chance of doing better than them . The destruction of stocks of wheat during the economic crisis had a profound effect on public opinion—and rightly so ; but if one thinks it over , the desertion of the land in the middle of an industrial crisis has something about it of a still more shocking character , if such were possible . It is obvious that there is no hope of solving the workmen ’ s problem separately from the peasants ’ . There is no means of preventing the working-class population from turning into a proletariat if it is constantly being increased by an afflux of peasants who have broken away from their past . The war has shown how serious are the ravages of this disease among the peasants . For the soldiers were young peasants . In September 1939 , one used to hear peasants say : ‘ Better to live as a German than die as a Frenchman. ’ What had been done to them to make them think that they had nothing to lose ? It is important to realize one of the greatest difficulties in the political sphere . If it is true that the workmen suffer cruelly through feeling themselves to be exiles in our present type of society , the peasants , for their part , are under the impression that in this society it is , on the contrary , only the workmen who are really in their element . In the eyes of the peasants , the intellectuals who champion the cause of the workmen don ’ t appear as defenders of the oppressed , but as defenders of a privileged class . The intellectuals are far from suspecting the existence of such an attitude . The inferiority complex in the countryside is such that you see peasant millionaires who find it natural to be treated by retired petits bourgeois with the sort of arrogance shown by colonials towards natives . An inferiority complex has to be very great for money not to be able to wipe it out . Consequently , the more one sets about satisfying the moral needs of the workmen , the more necessary it is to take steps to make the same provision for the peasants . Otherwise the resultant disequilibrium will be dangerous for society and have unpleasant repercussions on the workmen themselves . The need to feel rooted , with the peasants , takes first of all the form of a hunger for property . This is a real hunger with them , and a healthy and natural one . One is certain to make an impression on them by seriously putting forward hopes of this kind . And there is no reason why one should not do so , once it is the need of property which is recognized as sacred , and not the legal title laying down the form for holding property . There are any number of possible legal dispositions which would enable , little by little , the land not yet owned by peasants to be transferred to them . Nothing can justify the property rights of a townsman over a piece of land . Large agricultural estates are only justifiable in certain cases , for technical reasons ; and even in such cases , one can well imagine peasants cultivating vegetables and similar products intensively , each on his own little strip , and at the same time , with modern equipment , applying extensive methods of cultivation co-operatively over vast areas owned by them in common . A measure which would go straight to the heart of the peasants is one whereby land came to be regarded as raw material for carrying on work , and not as an asset in the distribution of an inheritance . In this way , we should no longer witness the shocking spectacle of a peasant in debt throughout the whole of his life to some brother in the government service doing less work and earning more money . Pensions—even the smallest ones—for the old on retirement would doubtless have a great effect . The word ‘ pension ’ has , unfortunately , magic properties which attract young peasants to the towns . The humiliation suffered by the old is often great in the country , and the drawing of a little money , under honourable conditions , would bolster up their prestige . Through the force of contrast , too great a stability produces in the peasant an uprooting effect . A youngster begins ploughing by himself at about the age of fourteen . The work is then pure poetry , an intoxicating pleasure for him , although he is barely strong enough to manage it . A few years later , that boyish enthusiasm has been exhausted , the job is familiar , the physical energy is overflowing , and far in excess of what is required for the work ; and yet there is no more to do than what has been done day after day for several years . So the young man starts to spend the week dreaming about what he is going to do on Sunday . From that moment he is lost . A peasant boy ’ s first complete contact with work , at the age of fourteen , this initial rapture of his , ought to be hallowed by a solemn ritual celebration of a kind to leave an indelible impression in the depths of his soul . In the more Christian villages , this celebration should bear a religious character . But besides this , three or four years later , some draught ought to be supplied to assuage his thirst for something new . For a young peasant , it can only take one form : travel . All young peasants should be given the opportunity to travel free of charge in France , or even abroad ; not about the cities , but about the countryside . It would involve organizing for the peasants something resembling the Tour de France.15 Cultural and educational facilities could be added . For very often the best among these young peasants , after having , at thirteen , abandoned school with a sort of violence in order to throw themselves into work , feel again towards eighteen or twenty a desire to learn . The same thing happens , by the way , to young workmen . Systems of exchange could make it possible for even young men regarded by their families as indispensable to go away . It goes without saying that such travels would be purely voluntary . But parents would not have the right to veto them . It is difficult to realize how strong the travel obsession is with peasants , and what a moral effect such a reform could have , even before it became a fact , at the promissory stage , and all the more so once the thing had come to be a part of ordinary habit . The young man , after knocking about the world for a few years , but without ever ceasing to be a peasant , would return home , his longings appeased , to found a family . Something of a similar nature is doubtless necessary for girls too . They certainly need something to take the place of Marie-Claire,16 and they certainly can not be left with Marie-Claire . Life in barracks has been a terrible source of uprooting for young peasants . So contrary was the final effect of military training to the one intended , that young men , after learning military exercises , were in less of a condition to fight than they were before having learned them ; for whoever left a barracks left it as an anti-militarist . This provides the practical proof that you can not , in the interests of the military machine itself , allow the military authorities to have the sovereign disposal of two years out of each life , or even only one year . Just as you can not leave Capitalism in sole charge of the professional training of youth , so you can not leave the Army in sole charge of its military training . The civil authorities must have a share in the latter , and in such a way as to make it a source of education instead of a source of corruption . Contact between young peasants and young workmen in the course of military service is not at all desirable . The latter seek to impress the former , which is bad for both of them . Contacts of this sort don ’ t really have the effect of bringing people together . Only a course of action pursued in common can do that ; and , in the nature of things , there can be no common action in barracks , since you are getting ready for war there in time of peace . There is no reason why barracks should be installed in towns . For the use of young peasants , one could very well have barracks far away from any town . It is true that the owners of brothels would suffer . But it is useless even to consider any kind of reform , unless one is absolutely determined to put a stop to the collusion between the public authorities and people of that sort , and to abolish an institution which is a disgrace to France.17 It may be mentioned , by the way , that we have paid dearly for this disgrace . Turning prostitution into an official institution , in the way this has been done in France , largely contributed towards demoralizing the army , and completely demoralized the police , which was bound to bring about the ruin of democracy . For it is not possible for a democracy to subsist when the police , who represent the law in the eyes of the citizens , are an open target for public contempt . People in England can not imagine any true sort of democracy in which the police are not regarded with an affectionate respect . But their police haven ’ t got a drove of prostitutes to amuse themselves with . If it were possible to reckon up exactly the factors which have contributed to our defeat , it would doubtless be found that all these things which have been our shame—like that one , and our colonial greediness , and our ill-treatment of foreigners—have each brought their individual and effective weight to bear in our general undoing . A lot of things can be said about our misfortune , but not that it is undeserved . Prostitution is a typical example of that natural ability possessed by this malady of uprootedness to propagate itself to the second power . The condition of professional prostitute constitutes the extreme degree of uprootedness , and , in connexion with this particular malady , a mere handful of prostitutes is sufficient to spread a tremendous amount of infection . It is clear that we shall never have a healthy peasant population so long as the State persists in bringing about of its own accord the meeting together of young peasants and prostitutes . And as long as our peasantry is unhealthy , our working-class can not be healthy either , nor the rest of the population . Moreover , nothing could be more popular with the peasants than a scheme for reforming the system of military service , paying special attention to their moral well-being . The problem concerning culture of the mind presents itself in the case of the peasants , as it does in that of the workmen . They also need to be provided with a translation suitable for them , and not the same as the one for the workmen . In all matters connected with things of the mind , the peasants have been brutally uprooted by conditions in the modern world . In the past they had everything which a human being can require in the way of art and thought , in a form which was their own , and was of the highest quality . When you read all that Restif de la Bretonne has written about his childhood , you can only conclude that the lot of the most unfortunate peasants of that time was infinitely preferable to that of the most fortunate ones of today . But it is impossible to return to the past , however close . Means must be devised to prevent the peasants from remaining unresponsive to the culture of the mind which is offered them . Science should be presented to peasants and workmen in very different ways . In the case of workmen , it is natural that mechanics should occupy the foremost place . In that of peasants , everything should be centred around the wonderful cycle whereby solar energy , poured down into plants , is retained in them by the action of chlorophyll , becomes concentrated in seeds and fruits , enters into Man in the form of food or drink , passes into his muscles and spends itself on preparing the soil . Everything connected with Science can be situated around this cycle , for the notion of energy is at the heart of everything . Were the thought of this cycle to sink deep into the minds of peasants , it would permeate their labour with poetry . Generally speaking , the main object of all education in the villages should be to increase the feeling for the beauty of the world , the beauty of nature . Tourists have , it is true , discovered that peasants are not interested in landscapes . But when you spend whole days doing exhausting work side by side with peasants—which is the only way of being able to have heart-to-heart talks with them—you hear some of them regretting their work is so hard as to leave them no time to enjoy the beauties of nature . Naturally , it isn ’ t simply by exclaiming : ‘ Look , how beautiful it is ! ’ that their feeling for beauty will be increased . It isn ’ t quite so simple as that . The movement in connexion with folk-lore which of late has been started in cultured circles should try to help the peasants to feel at home again in human thought . Under the present system , they are made to regard everything connected with thought as the exclusive property of the towns , in which one is willing to grant them a small , a very small , share , because they are incapable of conceiving for themselves a large one . It is the colonial mentality again , only in a less acute form . And just in the same way as a native from the colonies , who has a smattering of European education , can be brought to despise his own people more than would a cultured European , so the same thing often happens with a schoolteacher who comes from a peasant family . The first condition necessary for bringing about a moral rerooting of the peasantry in the country is that the profession of rural schoolteacher should be something distinct , specific ; not merely partially , but totally different from that of a schoolteacher in the towns . It is in the highest degree absurd to form in the same mould teachers for Belleville18 and for some little village . It is one of the many absurdities of an age whose salient characteristic is stupidity . The second condition is that the rural schoolteachers should know the peasants and not look down on them , which will not be obtained simply by recruiting them from among the peasantry . A very large part of their training ought to be devoted to the folk-lore of all countries , presented not as an object of curiosity , but as something superb . They should be told about the part played by shepherds in the first speculations made by the human mind , those concerning the stars , and also—as the comparisons which continually occur in ancient texts indicate—those concerning good and evil . They should be made to read peasant literature—Hesiod , Piers Plowman , the complaints of the Middle Ages , the few contemporary works which are of authentically peasant inspiration ; all this , of course , without forgetting the claims of general culture . After such a preparation , they could be sent to serve for a year as farm-hands , anonymously , in some other part of the country ; then assembled again in training-colleges to help them to see their own experience in proper perspective . Schoolteachers going to working-class and factory districts should be given an appropriate course on the same lines . But such experiences must be morally prepared for beforehand ; otherwise they arouse disdain and repulsion instead of compassion and love . It would be of great advantage , too , if the Churches were to turn the rôle of village priest or pastor into something specific . It is shocking to observe to what extent , in a French village which is wholly Catholic , religion can be divorced from daily life and reserved for a few hours only on Sunday , when one remembers what a preference Christ showed for taking the theme of his parables from country scenes . But a great many of these parables don ’ t figure in the liturgy , and the ones that do don ’ t excite any attention . In just the same way as the sun and stars the schoolteacher talks about inhabit the text-books and exercise-books and have nothing to do with the sky , so the vine , the corn , the sheep to which reference is made in church on Sundays have nothing in common with the vine , the corn and the sheep which are in the fields and to which every day one has to sacrifice a little part of one ’ s life . The peasants who are Christians are also uprooted so far as their religious life is concerned . The idea of showing a village without a church in the Exhibition of 1937 was not so absurd as many people said it was . Just as the young Jocistes19 feel exalted at the thought of Christ as a working-man , so the peasants should take a similar pride in the part devoted in the New Testament parables to the life of the fields and in the sacred function ascribed to bread and wine , and derive therefrom the feeling that Christianity is something which belongs to them . Polemics on the subject of laicization have constituted one of the chief sources responsible for the poisoning of peasant life in France . Unfortunately , they are far from having neared their end . It is impossible to avoid taking up a definite attitude in this matter , and at first sight it appears almost impossible to light on one which is not extremely unsatisfactory in itself . It is certain that neutrality is a lie . The laic ( anti-clerical ) system is not neutral . It inculcates in children a philosophy which is on the one hand very superior to religion of the Saint-Sulpice20 type , and on the other hand very inferior to genuine Christianity . But the latter is , nowadays , extremely rare . Many schoolteachers evince a zeal in their attachment to this philosophy comparable to religious fervour . Liberty of instruction is not a solution . The expression is meaningless . No one has any proprietary rights over the spiritual formation of a child : neither the child , for he is not in a position to act in the matter ; nor the parents ; nor the State . The rights of the family , so often invoked , are nothing but a handy weapon in the argument . Any priest who refrained from talking about Christ to a child belonging to a non-Christian family , when given a perfectly normal opportunity of doing so , would be one who had lost his faith . To keep the lay schools just as they are , and allow or even encourage , next door , competition on the part of the religious schools , is an absurdity , both from a theoretical and a practical point of view . Private schools , whether religious or not , should be authorized , not in virtue of any principle of liberty , but for reasons of public utility in every individual case where the school is a good one , and be subject only to public inspection . To let the clergy have a share in public education is not a solution either . Even if it were possible , it would not be desirable , and it is not possible in France without a civil war . To order the schoolteachers to talk about God to the children—as happened for some months under the Vichy Government , upon the recommendation of M. Chevalier21—is a joke in extremely bad taste . To allow laic philosophy to preserve its official status would be an arbitrary measure , and an unjust one , seeing that it fails to correspond to a true scale of values , and one which would hurl us straight into totalitarianism . For although laicization has produced a certain amount of fervour of an almost religious kind , it is , by the very nature of things , a strictly limited amount ; and we are living at a time when passions are fanned to white heat . Totalitarianism ’ s idolatrous course can only be arrested by coming up against a genuinely spiritual way of life . If children are brought up not to think about God , they will become Fascist or Communist for want of something to which to give themselves . We perceive more clearly what justice demands in this matter , once the notion of right has been replaced by that of obligation related to need . The soul of a child , as it reaches out towards understanding , has need of the treasures accumulated by the human species through the centuries . We do injury to a child if we bring it up in a narrow Christianity which prevents it from ever becoming capable of perceiving that there are treasures of the purest gold to be found in non-Christian civilizations . Lay education does an even greater injury to children . It covers up these treasures , and those of Christianity as well . The only attitude public education can adopt , in France , with regard to Christianity , which is at once legitimate and practically realizable , consists in looking upon it as one treasury of human thought among many others . It is too absurd for words that a French university graduate should have read poetry of the Middle Ages , Polyeucte , Athalie , Phèdre , Pascal , Lamartine , philosophical doctrines impregnated with Christianity like those of Descartes and Kant , the Divine Comedy or Paradise Lost , and never once have opened a Bible . Future professional teachers and schoolmasters should simply be told that religion has at all times and in all countries , save quite recently in certain parts of Europe , played a dominant rôle in the development of human culture , thought and civilization . An educational course in which no reference is made to religion is an absurdity . Furthermore , in the same way as when studying history little French children are told a lot about France , so it is natural that , being in Europe , when you talk about religion you should refer primarily to Christianity . Consequently , we ought to include in the teaching of the bigger children , at every stage , courses which could be described as , for example , religious history . The children would be made to read passages from the Bible , and above all the Gospels . Comments would be made in the spirit of the text itself , as should always be the case . One would talk about dogma as something which has played a rôle of the highest importance in our countries , and in which men of the very greatest eminence have believed wholeheartedly ; without hiding the fact either that it has been the pretext for inflicting any number of cruelties . But , above all , one would try to make the children feel all the beauty contained therein . If they ask : ‘ Is it true ? ’ , we should answer : ‘ It is so beautiful that it must certainly contain a lot of truth . As for knowing whether it is , or is not , absolutely true , try to become capable of deciding that for yourselves when you grow up. ’ It would be strictly forbidden to add , by way of commentary , anything implying either a negation of dogma or an affirmation of it . Any teacher or schoolmaster who wished and who had the necessary knowledge and teaching ability would be free to talk to the children not only about Christianity , but also , though laying far less stress on it , about no matter what genuine current of religious thought . Religious thought is genuine whenever it is universal in its appeal . ( Such is not the case with Judaism , which is linked to a racial conception . ) If such a solution were applied , religion would cease by degrees , it is to be hoped , being something one takes sides about for or against , in the same way as one takes sides in politics . Thus , we should abolish those two opposing camps—the schoolmaster ’ s and the curé ’ s—which foster a sort of latent civil war in so many French villages . Contact with the beauty of Christianity , presented simply as a beautiful thing to be savoured , would imperceptibly imbue the mass of the population with spirituality , if it is still capable of being so imbued , far more effectively than any amount of dogmatic teaching of religious beliefs . The use of the word beauty doesn ’ t in the least imply that religious questions should be considered after the manner of the aesthetes . The aesthetes ’ point of view is sacrilegious , not only in matters of religion but even in those of art . It consists in amusing oneself with beauty by handling it and looking at it . Beauty is something to be eaten ; it is a food . If we are going to offer the people Christian beauty purely on account of its beauty , it will have to be as a form of beauty which gives nourishment . In rural schools , the careful and regular reading , with frequent commentaries and repetitions , of those parts of the New Testament describing scenes of rural life , could do a lot to give back to the life of the fields its lost poetry . If on the one hand the whole spiritual life of the soul , and on the other hand all the scientific knowledge acquired concerning the material universe , are made to converge upon the act of work , work occupies its rightful place in a man ’ s thoughts . Instead of being a kind of prison , it becomes a point of contact between this world and the world beyond . For example , surely there is no reason why a peasant engaged in sowing shouldn ’ t have at the back of his mind , without shaping words—even unspoken ones—on the one hand certain similes drawn by Christ , such as : ‘ Unless the seed die … ’ , ‘ The seed is the Word of God … ’ , ‘ The grain of mustard seed … which is the least of all seeds … ’ , and on the other hand the double mechanism of growth ; the one whereby the seed , by consuming itself and with the aid of bacteria , reaches the surface of the soil ; and the other whereby solar energy pours down in rays of light , is captured by the green colouring matter of the plant-stalk , and rises upward in an irresistible ascending movement . The analogy which makes the mechanism of this world a reflection of the supernatural mechanism , if one may use that expression , then becomes luminously clear , and the fatigue induced by work , to use ordinary popular speech , gets it into the body . The toil always more or less associated with the work effort becomes the pain which makes the beauty of the world penetrate right to the very core of the human being . A similar method could charge the workman ’ s labour with a similar significance . It is just as easy to conceive . Thus only would the dignity of work be fully established . For , if we go to the heart of things , there is no true dignity without a spiritual root and consequently one of a supernatural order . The popular school ’ s job is to give more dignity to work by infusing it with thought , and not to make of the working-man a thing divided up into compartments which sometimes works and sometimes thinks . Naturally , a peasant who is sowing has to be careful to cast the seed properly , and not to be thinking about lessons learnt at school . But the object which engages our attention doesn ’ t form the whole content of our thoughts . A happy young woman , expecting her first child , and busy sewing a layette , thinks about sewing it properly . But she never forgets for an instant the child she is carrying inside her . At precisely the same moment , somewhere in a prison workshop , a female convict is also sewing , thinking , too , about sewing properly , for she is afraid of being punished . One might imagine both women to be doing the same work at the same time , and having their attention absorbed by the same technical difficulties . And yet a whole gulf of difference lies between one occupation and the other . The whole social problem consists in making the workers pass from one to the other of these two occupational extremes . What is required is that this world and the world beyond , in their double beauty , should be present and associated in the act of work , like the child about to be born in the making of the layette . Such an association can be achieved by a mode of presenting thoughts which relates them directly to the movements and operations peculiar to each sort of work , by a process of assimilation sufficiently complete to enable them to penetrate into the very substance of the individual being , and by a habit impressed upon the mind and connecting these thoughts with the work movements . We are not , at present , either intellectually or spiritually capable of such a transformation . We should be doing well if we were able to set about preparing for it . Naturally , schools alone would not be enough . All sections of the community in which something resembling thought still operates would have to take part : the Churches , trade-unions , literary and scientific circles . One hardly dare mention in this category political circles . Our age has its own particular mission , or vocation—the creation of a civilization founded upon the spiritual nature of work . The thoughts relating to a presentiment of this vocation , and which are scattered about in Rousseau , George Sand , Tolstoy , Proudhon and Marx , in papal encyclicals , and elsewhere , are the only original thoughts of our time , the only ones we haven ’ t borrowed from the Greeks . It is because we have been unequal to this mighty business which was being conceived in us that we have thrown ourselves into the abyss presented by totalitarian systems . But if Germany is beaten , possibly our moral bankruptcy will not be final . Maybe we still have a chance . One can not think about it without anguish . … If indeed , we have a chance , mediocre as we are , how shall we do so as not to miss it ? Such a vocation is the only thing great enough to put before the peoples instead of the totalitarian idol . If it is not put before them in such a way as to make them feel its grandeur , they will remain in the grip of the idol ; only it will be painted red instead of brown . When men are offered the choice between guns and butter , although they prefer butter so very much more than guns , a mysterious fatality compels them , in spite of themselves , to choose guns . There isn ’ t enough poetry about butter—at least , when you have some ; for it does take on a certain poetry when you haven ’ t any . But we dare not admit our preference for it . At the present moment , the United Nations , particularly America , spend their time saying to the starving populations of Europe : With our guns , we ’ re going to give you butter . This produces only one reaction , the thought that they don ’ t seem to be in any particular hurry about it . The day they are given this butter , the people will literally throw themselves upon it ; and immediately after that will turn towards whoever has some lovely guns , all nicely wrapped in their coverings , to show them , to no matter what ideology they may belong . Don ’ t let us imagine that being worn out , all they will ask for is a comfortable existence . Nervous exhaustion caused by some recent misfortune makes it impossible for those concerned to settle down to enjoy a comfortable existence . It forces people to seek forgetfulness , sometimes in a dizzy round of exacerbated enjoyment—as was the case after 1918—at other times in some dark and dismal fanaticism . When misfortune bites too deeply , it creates a disposition towards misfortune , which makes people plunge headlong into it themselves , dragging others along with them . Germany is an example of this . The unhappy peoples of the European continent are in need of greatness even more than of bread , and there are only two sorts of greatness : true greatness , which is of a spiritual order , and the old , old lie of world conquest . Conquest is an ersatz greatness . The contemporary form of true greatness lies in a civilization founded upon the spirituality of work . It is a conception that can be propagated without running the risk of promoting the slightest discord . The word spirituality doesn ’ t imply any particular affiliation . Even the Communists , in the present state of things , would probably not reject it . Besides , it would not be difficult to find in Marx quotations that can all be brought back to the reproach of a lack of spirituality levelled at capitalist society ; which implies that there ought to be some in the new society . The conservative parties wouldn ’ t dare to reject such a conception ; nor would radical , laical or masonic circles either . Christians would seize on it with joy . It could create unanimity . But one can only lay hold of such a conception in fear and trembling . How can we touch it without soiling it , turning it into a lie ? Our age is so poisoned by lies that it converts everything it touches into a lie . And we are of our age , and have no reason to consider ourselves better than our age . To bring discredit on words like these , by launching them among the general public without taking infinite precautions beforehand , would be to cause irreparable harm ; it would amount to killing all remaining hope that the thing itself should ever materialize . They must not be attached to a cause or a movement , nor even to a régime , nor to a nation either . We must not do them the sort of harm Pétain has done to the words ‘ Work , Family , Country ’ 22 , nor the harm either which the Third Republic has done to the words ‘ Liberty , Equality , Fraternity ’ . They must not be made a slogan . If they are presented to the public , it must be solely as the expression of a thought which reaches very far beyond the men and the societies of today , and which one proposes in all humility to keep ever before the mind as a guide in all things . If such modesty has less power to carry the masses with it than more ostentatious attitudes have , it can not be helped . It is better to fail than succeed in doing harm . But this thought would not have to be trumpeted about in order to permeate little by little people ’ s minds , because it is an answer to the uneasy feelings of all people at the present time . Everybody is busy repeating , in slightly different terms , that what we suffer from is a lack of balance , due to a purely material development of technical science . This lack of balance can only be remedied by a spiritual development in the same sphere , that is , in the sphere of work . The only difficulty lies in the painful mistrust—alas , only too well founded—of the masses , who look upon any slightly elevated proposition as a snare set to trap them . A civilization based upon the spirituality of work would give to Man the very strongest possible roots in the wide universe , and would consequently be the opposite of that state in which we find ourselves now , characterized by an almost total uprootedness . Such a civilization is , therefore , by its very nature , the object to which we should aspire as the antidote to our sufferings . UPROOTEDNESS AND NATIONHOOD There is still another kind of uprootedness to be considered so as to be able to have a rough idea of our principal disease . It is the kind one might call geographical , that is to say , concerned with human collectivities occupying clearly defined territorial limits . The actual significance of these collectivities has wellnigh disappeared , except in one case only—that of the nation . But there are , and have been , very many other examples ; some on a smaller , sometimes quite a small , scale , in the shape of a town , collection of villages , province or region ; others comprising many different nations ; and yet others comprising bits of many different nations . The nation , single and separate , has taken the place of all that—the nation , or in other words , the State ; for there is no other way of defining the word nation than as a territorial aggregate whose various parts recognize the authority of the same State . One may say that , in our age , money and the State have come to replace all other bonds of attachment . For a long time now , the single nation has played the part which constitutes the supreme mission of society towards the individual human being , namely , maintaining throughout the present the links with the past and the future . In this sense , one may say that it is the only form of collectivity existing in the world at the present time . The family doesn ’ t exist . What nowadays goes by that name is a minute collection of human beings grouped around each of us : father and mother , husband or wife , and children ; brothers and sisters being already a little remote . Latterly , in the midst of the general distress , this little nucleus has developed an almost irresistible force of attraction , to the extent sometimes of making people cast aside every kind of duty ; but that is because there alone people could find a little living warmth against the icy cold which all of a sudden had descended on them . It was an almost animal reaction . But no one thinks nowadays about his ancestors who died fifty or even only twenty or ten years before his birth ; nor about his descendants who will be born fifty or even only twenty or ten years after his death . Consequently , from the point of view of the collectivity and its particular function , the family no longer counts . Looked at from this point of view , a profession doesn ’ t count either . A corporation , or guild , was a link between the dead , the living and those yet unborn , within the framework of a certain specified occupation . There is nothing today which can be said to exist , however remotely , for the purpose of carrying out such a function . French trade-unionism , around 1900 , may possibly have shown a certain tendency in this direction , but it never came to anything . Finally , the village , district , province or region—all the geographical units smaller than the nation—have almost ceased to count ; as have all geographical units composed of many nations or bits of many nations , too . When one used to say , for example , a few centuries ago , ‘ Christendom ’ , the word had quite a different affective implication from that of the present-day ‘ Europe ’ . To sum up , Man has placed his most valuable possession in the world of temporal affairs , namely , his continuity in time , beyond the limits set by human existence in either direction , entirely in the hands of the State . And yet it is just in this very period when the nation stands alone and supreme that we have witnessed its sudden and extraordinarily rapid decomposition . This has left us stunned , so that we find it extremely difficult to think clearly on the subject . The French people , in June and July 1940 , were not a people waylaid by a band of ruffians , whose country was suddenly snatched from them . They are a people who opened their hands and allowed their country to fall to the ground . Later on—but after a long interval—they spent themselves in ever more and more desperate efforts to pick it up again ; but some one had placed his foot on it . Now a national sense has returned . The words ‘ to die for France ’ have again taken on a meaning which they hadn ’ t possessed since 1918 . But in the movement of opposition which has seized hold of the French people , hunger , cold , the always hateful presence of foreign soldiers exercising complete authority , the breaking-up of families , for some exile , captivity—all these sufferings have at least played a very large part , most likely a decisive one . The best proof of this lies in the difference in spirit distinguishing the occupied from the unoccupied zone . Nature has not dispensed any greater amount of patriotic fervour to those living north than to those living south of the Loire . Different situations have simply produced different states of mind . The example set by England , hopes of a German defeat , have also been important contributory factors . France ’ s only reality today consists in memories and hopes . The Republic never seemed so beautiful as under the Empire ; one ’ s native land never seems to beautiful as when under the heel of a conqueror , if there is hope of seeing it again intact . That is why one shouldn ’ t take the present intensity of national feeling for a guide as to its actual efficacy , once liberation has been effected , for ensuring the stability of public life . The memory of the sudden dissolution of this feeling in June 1940 is one so charged with shame , that one prefers not to think about it , to rule it out altogether and only to think about how to set things to rights again for the future . In private life also , each of us is always tempted to set his own failings , to a certain extent , on one side , relegate them to some attic , invent some method of calculation whereby they turn out to be of no real consequence . To give way to this temptation is to ruin the soul ; it is the one that , above all , has to be conquered . We have all succumbed to this temptation , on account of the public shame which has been so deep that each one of us has felt wounded to the quick in his own feelings of personal honour . Without this temptation , reflections concerning so extraordinary an event would already have given rise to some new patriotic doctrine , some new patriotic conception . From the social point of view , more especially , it will be impossible to avoid considering the notion of patriotism . Not considering it afresh , but considering it for the first time ; for , unless I am mistaken , it never has been considered . Strange indeed , for a notion which has played and still plays so important a rôle , isn ’ t it ? That just shows what sort of a place we really accord to thought . The idea of patriotism had lost all credit among French workmen during the last quarter of a century . The Communists put it into circulation again after 1934 , to the accompaniment of plentiful tricolour flags and singing of the Marseillaise . But they hadn ’ t the least compunction in withdrawing it and placing it on the shelf again a little before the war . It is not in the name of patriotism that they started setting up a resistance . They only began adopting it again about nine months after the defeat . Little by little they have adopted it entirely . But only simpletons would take that to mean a veritable reconciliation between the working-class and the country . Workmen are dying for their country—that is only too true . But we live in an age so impregnated with lies that even the virtue of blood voluntarily sacrificed is insufficient to put us back on the path of truth . For very many years , workmen were taught that internationalism was the most sacred of all duties , and patriotism the most shameful of all bourgeois prejudices . Then more years were spent teaching them that patriotism was a sacred duty , and anything that wasn ’ t patriotism a betrayal . How , at the end of all that , could they be expected to react otherwise than crudely and in obedience to propaganda ? A healthy working-class movement is out of the question , unless it be given a doctrine assigning a place to the idea of patriotism , and a clearly defined , that is , a limited , place . Moreover , this need is only more evident in working-class circles than elsewhere because the problem of patriotism has been so much discussed in them for so long . But it is a need common to the whole country . It is unpardonable that a word which nowadays is almost always to be found coupled with the word duty should hardly ever have been made the subject of any investigation . As a rule , all people can find to quote in connexion with it is a mediocre page of Renan ’ s . The nation is a recent innovation . In the Middle Ages , allegiance was owed to the lord , or the city , or both , and by extension to territorial areas not very clearly defined . The sentiment we call patriotism certainly existed , often to a very intense degree ; only its object was not set within territorial limits . The sentiment covered variable extensions of land , according to circumstances . Actually , patriotism has always existed , as far back as we can go in history . Vercingetorix really died for Gaul ; the Spanish tribes which resisted conquest by the Romans , sometimes to the point of extermination , died for Spain , knowing they were doing so , and declaring it ; those who died at marathon and Salamis died for Greece ; at a time when Greece , not having yet been reduced to a province , was in relation to Rome in the same position as Vichy France is to Germany , children in the Greek towns used openly to pelt collaborators with stones and call them traitors , with the same indignation which we feel today . What had never existed right up to recent times was some definite , circumscribed thing , permanently installed as an object of patriotic devotion . Patriotism was something diffuse , nomadic , which expanded or contracted according to degrees of similarity and common danger . It was mixed up with different kinds of loyalty—loyalty to other men , a lord , a king , or a city . The whole formed something very complicated , but also very human . To express the sense of obligation every one feels towards his country , people would usually talk about ‘ the public ’ or ‘ the public good ’ , an expression which can serve equally well to indicate a village , town , province , France , Christendom or Mankind . People also talked about the kingdom of France . In the latter expression , the sense of obligation towards the country was mingled with that of fidelity to the king . But two obstacles have prevented this sentiment from ever being a pure one , not even in the time of Joan of Arc . It must be remembered that the population of Paris was against Joan of Arc . The first obstacle was that , on the death of Charles V , France , to use Montesquieu ’ s words , ceased to be a monarchy and fell into the state of despotism from which she only emerged in the eighteenth century . Nowadays , we find it so natural to pay taxes to the State , that we have difficulty in imagining the moral upheaval in the midst of which this custom was first introduced . In the fourteenth century , to pay any taxes other than exceptional levies acquiesced in for war purposes was looked upon as dishonourable , a disgrace reserved for conquered countries , and the manifest sign of slavery . The same feeling is found expressed in the Spanish Romancero , and also in Shakespeare : ‘ That England … hath made a shameful conquest of itself ’ . Charles VI , during his minority , aided and abetted by his uncles , by using corruption and the vilest cruelty , brutally compelled the people of France to accept a perfectly arbitrary tax , renewable at will , which literally reduced the poor to starvation , whilst the noblemen frittered away the proceeds . It is for this reason that the English of Henry V ’ s day were first of all welcomed as liberators , at a time when the Armagnacs represented the side of the rich and the Burgundians that of the poor . The French people , brutally and at one fell swoop made to submit to the yoke , thereafter , right up to the eighteenth century , gave only spasmodic signs of independence . Throughout the whole of this period they were looked upon by other Europeans as the perfect example of an enslaved people , a people who could be treated like cattle by their sovereign . But , meanwhile , there arose deep down in the heart of this people a suppressed hatred of the king—all the more bitter for remaining unexpressed—a traditional hatred never to be extinguished . One senses it already in a heartrending complaint by the peasants under Charles VI . It must have played a part in the mysterious popularity of the League in Paris . After Henry IV ’ s assassination , a child of twelve was put to death for having publicly declared that he would do as much to the little Louis XIII . Richelieu began his career by a speech in which he called upon the clergy to proclaim that all regicides would be damned , giving as his reason the fact that those nursing such a design were filled with far too fanatical an enthusiasm to be restrained by any temporal penalty . This hatred reached its climax at the end of the reign of Louis XIV . Having been repressed by a terror of like intensity , it exploded , in accordance with the disconcerting time lags of history , eighty years later ; and it was the unfortunate Louis XVI who received the full blast . This same hatred made it impossible for a monarchical restoration really to take place in 1815 . Even today , it makes it absolutely impossible for the Comte de Paris to be freely accepted by the French people , in spite of the example set by a man like Bernanos . In some respects , this is a pity : a number of problems could be solved in this way ; but so it is . Another source which has poisoned the love of Frenchmen for the kingdom of France lies in the fact that at all times , among the lands owing obedience to the king of France , there were some that regarded themselves as conquered territory and were treated as such . It must be admitted that the forty kings who in a thousand years made France,23 did so often with a brutality worthy of our own age . If a natural correspondence exists between the tree and its fruit , we mustn ’ t be surprised if the fruit is , in fact , very far from being perfect . For example , history can show us deeds of an atrocity equal to , but not greater than—save perhaps a few rare exceptions—that of the conquest by the French of the lands situated to the south of the Loire , at the beginning of the thirteenth century . These lands , where a high level of culture , tolerance , liberty and spiritual life prevailed , were filled with an intensely patriotic feeling for what they termed their ‘ language ’ —a word which , for them , was synonymous with native land . To them , the French were as much foreigners and barbarians as the Germans are to us . In order to drive terror immediately into every heart , the French began by destroying the town of Béziers in toto , and obtained the results sought . Once the country had been conquered , they installed the Inquisition there . A muffled spirit of unrest went on smouldering among these people , and later on induced them to embrace with fervour the Protestant religion , which , according to d ’ Aubigné , in spite of very great divergencies in doctrine , is directly traceable to the Albigenses . We can judge how strong the hatred of the central power was in these parts , by the religious devotion manifested in Toulouse in connexion with the remains of the duc de Montmorency , beheaded for plotting against Richelieu . The same latent sense of protest caused them to throw themselves enthusiastically into the French Revolution . Later on , they became Radical-Socialists , anti-clericals . Under the Third Republic , they no longer hated the central power ; they had largely acquired control of it and were exploiting it . We may note that on each occasion their protest has been characterized by a more intense uprootedness and by a lower spiritual and intellectual level . We may also note that since they were conquered , these lands have made a rather feeble contribution towards French culture , whereas before they were so brilliantly alive culturally . French thought has been more enriched by the Albigenses and troubadours of the twelfth century , who were not Frenchmen , than by the entire output from this part of France in the course of succeeding centuries . The dukedom of Burgundy was the home of an original and extremely brilliant culture , which didn ’ t survive the dukedom ’ s disappearance . The Flemish cities were secretly , at the end of the fourteenth century , on the friendliest terms with Paris and Rouen ; nevertheless , wounded Flemings preferred to die rather than be looked after by the soldiers of Charles VI . Some of the latter went on a pillaging expedition into Holland , and brought back some rich burghers whom they decided to kill . In a sudden access of pity , they offered them their lives if they would only become subjects of the French king . They replied that , once dead , their very bones would protest , if they were able , at being subjected to the authority of the king of France . A Catalan historian of the same period , in telling the story of the Sicilian Vespers , writes : ‘ The French , who , wherever they exercise power , are as cruel as it is possible to be … ’ The Bretons were in despair when their sovereign Anne was forced to marry the king of France . If these same Bretons could return today , or better have returned some years ago , would they find or have found very strong reasons for thinking they had been mistaken ? However discredited the Breton autonomist movement may be by the type of people manipulating it and the sinister ends they pursue , there is no doubt that this propaganda stands for something real both in fact and in the minds of the population concerned . There are hidden treasures in these people which have never managed to see the light of day . French culture doesn ’ t suit them ; their own is unable to put forth shoots ; hence they find themselves , as a people , relegated to the very bottom of the lower social strata . A large proportion of illiterate soldiers are Breton men , and , so it is said , a large proportion of Parisian prostitutes are Breton women . Autonomy would not be a remedy ; but this doesn ’ t mean that the disease doesn ’ t exist . Franche-Comté , which lived freely and happily under the very distant suzerainty of the Spanish , fought in the seventeenth century in order not to become French . The people of Strasburg wept when they saw the troops of Louis XIV entering their city in time of peace , without a previous declaration of any kind , through a violation of a solemn undertaking worthy of Hitler . Paoli , the last Corsican hero , battled heroically to prevent his country from coming under French rule . There is a monument to his honour in a church in Florence ; in France he is hardly remembered . Corsica is an example of the danger of infection involved in uprootedness . After having conquered , colonized , corrupted and debased the people of that island , we have now had to put up with them in the shape of prefects of police , police narks , sergeant-majors , pions24 and other functions of a like nature , in pursuit of which they , in their turn , have treated the French like a more or less conquered people . They have also contributed towards giving France in the minds of numerous natives belonging to the colonies a reputation for cruelty and brutality . Although the kings of France are praised for having assimilated the countries they conquered , the truth is that they to a large extent uprooted them . This is an easy method of assimilation , within the reach of anybody . People who have their culture taken away from them either carry on without any at all , or else accept the odds and ends of the culture one condescends to give them . In either event , they don ’ t stand out individually , so they appear to be assimilated . The real marvel is to assimilate populations so that they preserve their culture , though necessarily modified , as a living thing . It is a marvel which very seldom takes place . It is true that , under the Ancien Régime , the French showed themselves to be intensely conscious of their French-ness in all periods of particular splendour for France : in the thirteenth century , when the whole of Europe flocked to the University of Paris ; in the sixteenth century , when the Renaissance , already extinguished or not yet lighted elsewhere , had its seat in France ; in the early part of Louis XIV ’ s reign , when arms and letters enjoyed a dual prestige . It is none the less certain that it was not the kings who welded together these disparate territories . It was solely the Revolution . Already during the eighteenth century there existed in France , in very different ranks of society , alongside the grossest forms of corruption , a bright , pure flame of patriotism . Take for example the brilliantly gifted young peasant , brother of Restif de la Bretonne , who was hardly more than a child when he became a soldier out of pure love for the public weal , and was killed at the age of seventeen . But that was already the Revolution at work . People felt a presentiment of it , waited for it , longed for it , right throughout the century . The Revolution melted all the peoples subject to the French Crown into one single mass , and that by their enthusiasm for national sovereignty . Those who had been Frenchmen by force , became so by free consent ; many of those who were not French wanted to become so . For to be French , thenceforward , meant belonging to the sovereign nation . If all the peoples , everywhere , had become sovereign—as was hoped—none could take away from France the honour of having been the first to begin . Besides , frontiers no longer counted . Foreigners were only people who went on being the slaves of tyrants . Foreigners of a genuinely republican spirit were willingly accepted as honorary Frenchmen . Thus , in France , there has been this paradox of a patriotism founded , not on love of the past , but on the most violent break with the country ’ s past . And yet , the Revolution had a past in the more or less underground part of French history : everything connected with the freeing of the serfs , liberties of the towns , social struggles ; the revolts in the fourteenth century , the beginnings of the Burgundian movement , the Fronde ; and then writers like d ’ Aubigné , Théophile de Viau , Retz . Under François I , a project for creating a people ’ s militia was set aside , because the noblemen objected that if it was put into operation the militiamen ’ s grandsons would find themselves noblemen and their own grandsons serfs . So great was the dynamic force thrusting beneath the surface of this people . But the influence of the Encyclopédistes , all of them uprooted intellectuals , all obsessed with the idea of progress , killed any chance of inspiration being sought in a revolutionary tradition . Besides , the prolonged terror under Louis XIV had left a gap difficult to bridge . It is because of this that , in spite of Montesquieu ’ s efforts in a contrary sense , the liberating current of the eighteenth century found itself without historical roots : 1789 really was an open break . The sentiment which then went by the name of patriotism was solely concerned with the present and the future . It was the love of the sovereign nation , based to a large extent on pride in belonging to it . The quality of being French seemed to be not so much a natural fact as a choice on the part of the will , like joining a party or church in our own day . As for those who remained attached to the past history of France , their attachment took the form of a personal and dynastic fidelity to the king . They saw nothing wrong in looking to foreign kings to send them armed help . They were not traitors . They remained faithful to what they thought they owed faithfulness , exactly like the men who brought about the death of Louis XVI . The only people at that time who were patriots , in the sense that word took on later , were those who appeared in the eyes of their contemporaries—and have since appeared in those of posterity—as arch-traitors ; men like Talleyrand , who served , not , as has been said , every régime , but France behind every régime . But for such men France was neither the sovereign nation nor the king ; it was the French State . Subsequent events have shown how right they were . For , when the illusion of national sovereignty showed itself to be manifestly an illusion , it could no longer serve as an object of patriotism ; on the other hand , kingship was like one of those severed plants one doesn ’ t replant again . Patriotism had to change its meaning and turn itself towards the State . But thereby it straightaway ceased to be popular . For the State was not something brought into being in 1789 ; it dated from the beginning of the seventeenth century , and shared some of the hatred nursed by the people against the monarchy . Thus it happened that , by an historical paradox which at first sight seems surprising , patriotism changed to a different social class and political camp . It had been on the Left ; it went over to the Right . The change-over was completed following upon the Commune and the inauguration of the Third Republic . The May massacre of 1871 was a blow from which , morally , French workmen have perhaps never recovered . And it is not so long ago as all that . A workman of fifty at the present time can well have listened to horrified accounts of it from the lips of his father , then a child . The nineteenth-century French army was a specific creation of the Revolution . Even soldiers in the service of the Bourbons , Louis-Philippe or Napoleon III must certainly have fired on the people very much against their own inclination . In 1871 , for the first time since the Revolution , leaving out the brief interlude of 1848 , France possessed a republican army . This same army , composed of decent young fellows from the French countryside , set about massacring workmen with an extraordinary display of sadistic pleasure . It was enough to produce a considerable shock . The principal cause of this was doubtless the need of compensation for the disgrace of the defeat , that same need which led us a little later on to conquer the unfortunate Annamites . Everything points to the fact that , unless supernatural grace intervenes , there is no form of cruelty or depravity of which ordinary , decent people are not capable , once the corresponding psychological mechanisms have been set in motion . The Third Republic was another shock . It is easy to believe in national sovereignty so long as wicked kings or emperors hold the nation in thrall ; people think : if only they weren ’ t there ! … But when they are no longer there , when democracy has been installed and nevertheless the People is indubitably not sovereign , bewilderment is inevitable . The year 1871 was the last year of that particular sort of French patriotism born in 1789 . Frederick , the German Prince Imperial—afterwards Frederick II—a humane , reasonable and intelligent man , was very much surprised by the intensity of this patriotism , which he encountered everywhere throughout the course of the campaign . He couldn ’ t understand why the Alsatians , hardly knowing a word of French , speaking a dialect closely allied to German , brutally conquered at a relatively recent date , refused to have anything to do with Germany . He discovered that the motive for this was the pride felt in belonging to the country which had produced the French Revolution , to the sovereign nation . Their annexation , by separating them from France , doubtless helped them to preserve this state of mind , at any rate partially , right up to 1918 . The Paris Commune was not , to begin with , a social movement at all , but an outburst of patriotism and even of extreme chauvinism . All through the nineteenth century , moreover , the aggressive turn taken by French patriotism had alarmed the rest of Europe . The war of 1870 was the direct outcome of this ; for though France had not made preparations for war , she had none the less declared it without any plausible reason . Dreams of imperial conquest had remained alive among the people right throughout the century . At the same time , toasts were drunk to world independence . Conquering the world and liberating the world are , in fact , two incompatible forms of glory , but which can be easily reconciled with one another in reverie . All this bubbling-up of popular feeling died away after 1871 . Two things , nevertheless , caused an appearance of patriotic continuity to be maintained . One was the resentment at being defeated . There was not yet at that time any real reason for bearing the Germans a grudge . They had not been the aggressors ; they had pretty well refrained from committing atrocities ; and it was not our place to reproach them with violating the rights of peoples in connexion with Alsace-Lorraine , whose population is largely Germanic , from the moment we began sending our first expeditions into Annam . But we bore them a grudge for having beaten us , just as though they had violated some divine , eternal , imprescriptible right to victory on the part of France . In our present hatred of them , for which , unfortunately , there exist only too many legitimate reasons , this curious sentiment also plays its part . It was also one of the motives behind the action of certain collaborationists right at the beginning . If France found herself on the side of the vanquished , they thought , it could only be because of some faulty deal , some mistake , some misunderstanding ; her natural place was on the side of the victors ; therefore , the easiest , least arduous , least painful method of bringing about the indispensable rectification was to change sides . This state of mind was very prevalent in certain circles at Vichy in July 1940 . But what above all prevented French patriotism from disappearing altogether under the Third Republic , after losing nearly all its vital sap , was the fact that there was nothing else . The French had nothing except France to which to remain faithful ; and when they abandoned her for a while , in June 1940 , one saw how hideous and pitiful could be the spectacle of a people no longer attached by bonds of fidelity to anything whatever . That is why , later on , they once again clung on exclusively to France . But if the French People recovers its sovereignty—at least , what nowadays goes by that name—the same difficulty as before 1940 will reappear , namely , that the reality designated by the word France will be above all a State . The State is a cold concern which can not inspire love , but itself kills , suppresses everything that might be loved ; so one is forced to love it , because there is nothing else . That is the moral torment to which all of us today are exposed . Here lies perhaps the true cause of that phenomenon of the leader which has sprung up everywhere nowadays and surprises so many people . Just now , there is in all countries , in all movements , a man who is the personal magnet for all loyalties . Being compelled to embrace the cold , metallic surface of the State has made people , by contrast , hunger for something to love which is made of flesh and blood . This phenomenon shows no signs of disappearing , and , however disastrous the consequences have been so far , it may still have some very unpleasant surprises in store for us ; for the art , so well known in Hollywood , of manufacturing stars out of any sort of human material , gives any sort of person the opportunity of presenting himself for the adoration of the masses . Unless I am mistaken , the idea of making the State an object of loyalty appeared for the first time in France and in Europe with Richelieu . Before his time , people used to talk in religious-like tones about the public weal , the country , the king or the local lord . It was he who first adopted the principle that whoever exercises a public function owes his entire loyalty , in the exercise of that function , not to the public , or to the king , but to the State and nothing else . It would be difficult to give an exact definition of the State . But it is , unfortunately , only too obvious that the word stands for something very real . Richelieu , who possessed the intellectual clarity so common at that time , defined in luminous terms the difference between politics and morals , over which there has subsequently arisen so much confused thinking . Here is more or less what he said : We should beware of applying the same rules to the welfare of the State as to that of the soul ; for the welfare of souls is attended to in the world above , whereas that of States is only attended to in this world . That is cruelly exact . A Christian ought to be able to draw therefrom but one conclusion : that whereas to the welfare of the soul , or in other words to God , a total , absolute and unconditional loyalty is owed ; the welfare of the State is a cause to which only a limited and conditional loyalty is owed . But although Richelieu believed himself to be a Christian , and no doubt sincerely , his conclusion was a totally different one , namely , that a man responsible for the welfare of the State , and the men under him , must employ to this end all useful means , without any exception , and , if necessary , sacrifice thereto their own lives , their sovereign , their people , foreign countries , and any and every species of obligation . It represents—but in a much nobler form—Maurras ’ doctrine : ‘ Politique d ’ abord ’ . But Maurras , with perfect logic , is an atheist . The Cardinal , in postulating something whose whole reality is confined to this world as an absolute value , committed the sin of idolatry . Nor , in this connexion , is it metal , stone or wood which are really dangerous . The real sin of idolatry is always committed on behalf of something similar to the State . It was this sin which the devil wanted Christ to commit when he offered him the kingdoms of this world . Christ refused . Richelieu accepted . He had his reward . But he always believed himself to be acting solely out of devotion , and in a sense it was true . His devotion to the State uprooted France . His policy was to kill systematically all spontaneous life in the country , so as to prevent anything whatsoever being able to oppose the State . If certain limits seem to have been set to his action in this sense , that is only because he was beginning and was astute enough to proceed gradually . All one needs to do is to read Corneille ’ s dedicatory prefaces to realize to what vile depths of servility he had managed to reduce people ’ s minds . Later on , to shield our national glory from shame , some people hit on the idea of saying that all this was merely the polite language of the time . But it ’ s a lie . To convince oneself of the fact , all one has to do is to read what Théophile de Viau has written . Only , Théophile died prematurely as a result of an arbitrary imprisonment , whereas Corneille lived to a grand old age . Literature is only useful to us here as a sign ; but it is a sure sign . Corneille ’ s servile language shows that Richelieu wanted to enslave people ’ s very minds ; not for his own benefit , for in his self-abnegation he was probably sincere , but for that of the State he represented . His conception of the State was already totalitarian . He applied it as much as he was able to by subjecting the country , to the full extent the means of the time allowed , to a police régime . He thus destroyed a considerable part of the moral life of the country . If France submitted herself to be gagged in this way , it is because the nobility had so laid her waste by nonsensical and atrociously cruel civil wars that she consented to buy civil peace at that price . After the Fronde outburst , which in its beginnings , from many points of view , was a forerunner of 1789 , Louis XIV set himself up in power far more in the spirit of a dictator than in that of a legitimate sovereign . That is what his phrase ‘ L ’ Etat , c ’ est moi ’ indicates . It is not a kingly conception . Montesquieu has explained all this very clearly , in roundabout terms . But what he couldn ’ t yet perceive in his time was that there have been two stages in the decline of the French monarchy . After Charles V , the monarchy degenerated into a personal despotism . But from Richelieu onwards , it was replaced by a State machine with totalitarian tendencies , which , as Marx points out , has not only outlasted all changes of régime , but has been strengthened and perfected by each succeeding change . During the Fronde and under Mazarin , France , in spite of the general distress , was morally able to breathe . Louis XIV found her full of brilliant men of genius whom he recognized and encouraged . But at the same time he carried on , to a much higher degree of intensity , the policy of Richelieu . In this way he reduced France in a very short time to a desert from the moral point of view , not to mention one of fearful material poverty . If one reads Saint-Simon , not as a literary and historical curiosity , but as a document dealing with the lives of human beings who actually lived , one is overcome with horror and disgust at such a turgid atmosphere of mortal ennui , such widespread spiritual , moral and intellectual baseness . La Bruyère , the letters of Liselotte—all the documents of the time , read in the same spirit , leave the same impression . Going back even a little further , one should certainly realize , for example , that Molière didn ’ t write his Misanthrope just for fun . Louis XIV ’ s régime was really already totalitarian . The country was ravaged by terrorism and denunciation . The idolizing of the State in the person of the sovereign was organized with an impudence which was an outrage to all Christian consciences . The art of propaganda was already thoroughly understood , as is shown by that ingenuous admission by the chief of police to Liselotte regarding the orders received not to allow any book on any subject to appear which didn ’ t contain an extravagant eulogy of the king . Under this régime , uprootedness in the French provinces , the suppression of all local life , reached a far higher degree of intensity . The eighteenth century provided a lull . The operation whereby national sovereignty was substituted for royal sovereignty under the Revolution had only this drawback , the nonexistence of national sovereignty . As in the case of Orlando ’ s mare,25 that was the only defect to be found . In point of fact , there existed no known means of creating something concrete corresponding to these words . Thenceforward , there remained only the State , which naturally reaped the benefit of the strong desire for unity— ‘ unity or death ’ —which had developed around the belief in national sovereignty . Whence , further destruction in the sphere of local life . With the aid of war—war having been from the very start the mainspring of all this business—the State , under the Convention and the Empire , became ever more and more totalitarian . Louis XIV had debased the Gallic Church by associating it with the cult of his own person and by imposing obedience on it even in matters of religion . This servile attitude of the Church towards the sovereign was very largely responsible for the anti-clericalism of the following century . But when the Church committed the irreparable mistake of making common cause with the monarchy , it thereby cut itself off from the general life of the nation . Nothing was better able to serve the totalitarian designs of the State . The only result could be the laical system , prelude to that open adoration of the State as such which is now so much in favour . Christians are defenceless against the laical spirit . For either they must throw themselves entirely into political action , party politics , to put temporal power back again into the hands of the clergy , or the supporters of the clergy ; or else they must resign themselves to being irreligious , in their turn , in all that appertains to the secular side of their own lives , which is what usually happens today , to a far greater extent than those concerned realize themselves . In either case , they set aside the proper function of religion , which is to suffuse with its light all secular life , public or private , without ever in any way dominating it . During the nineteenth century , the railways caused frightful havoc from the point of view of uprootedness . George Sand was still able to see in her native Berry customs which maybe went back for several thousand years , the very memory of which would have been entirely lost but for the hasty notes she took down concerning them . Loss of the past , whether it be collectively or individually , is the supreme human tragedy , and we have thrown ours away just like a child picking off the petals of a rose . It is above all to avoid this loss that peoples will put up a desperate resistance to being conquered . Now , the totalitarian phenomenon of the State arises through a conquest carried out by the public authorities of the people under their care , without being able to spare them the evils necessarily accompanying all conquests , in order to possess a better instrument for carrying out foreign conquest . This is what happened formerly in France and has happened more recently in Germany , not to mention Russia . But the development of the State exhausts a country . The State eats away its moral substance , lives on it , fattens on it , until the day comes when no more nourishment can be drawn from it , and famine reduces it to a condition of lethargy . That was the condition France had reached . In Germany , on the other hand , the centralization of the State is quite a recent development , consequently there the State possesses all the aggressiveness supplied by a superabundance of food of high energizing content . As for Russia , popular life is so intensely strong there , that one wonders whether , in the end , it isn ’ t the people that will devour the State , or rather re-absorb it . The Third Republic , in France , was a very curious affair ; one of its most curious features being that its entire structure , outside the actual arena of parliamentary life , was derived from the Empire . The love Frenchmen have for abstract logic makes it very easy for them to be deceived by labels . The English have a kingdom with a republican content ; we had a republic with an imperial content . Moreover , the Empire itself was linked , over and beyond the Revolution , back in an unbroken chain to the monarchy ; not the ancient French monarchy , but the totalitarian , police-ridden one of the seventeenth century . The personality of Fouché is a symbol of this continuity . The repressive apparatus of the French State continued on throughout all changes without being troubled or interrupted , with an ever-increasing power of action . That is why the State , in France , remained a target for people ’ s resentment , hatred and aversion , which , in the past , had been aroused by royal government turned tyrannical . We have actually lived through this strange paradox , so strange that one couldn ’ t even be aware of it at the time : a democracy in which all public institutions , and all things connected with them , were openly hated and despised by the entire population . No Frenchman had the slightest qualms about robbing or cheating the State in the matter of customs , taxes , subsidies or anything else . We must except certain ranks of civil servants ; but they formed part of the State machine . If the middle-classes went much further than anybody else in the country in dealings of this sort , it was solely because far more opportunities came their way . The police , in France , are held in such profound contempt that many Frenchmen regard this attitude as one necessarily built into the everlasting moral structure of the respectable citizen . Guignol26 forms part of genuine French folk-lore , which goes back to the Ancien Régime and has never grown out of date . The epithet ‘ policier ’ constitutes in French one of the most scathing insults , and it would be interesting to know if exact equivalents exist in other languages.27 But , of course , the police are really nothing other than the active instrument at the service of the authorities . The feelings of the French people with regard to this instrument have remained the same as they were in the days when peasants were obliged , as Rousseau noted , to conceal the fact that they had a piece of ham in the house . Similarly , the whole series of political institutions were the object of disgust , derision and disdain . The very word politics had taken on a profoundly pejorative meaning incredible in a democracy . ‘ Oh , he ’ s a politician , ’ ‘ all that , that ’ s just politics ’ : such phrases expressed final and complete condemnation . In the eyes of a number of French people , even the parliamentary profession itself—for it was a profession—had something ignominious about it . Some Frenchmen prided themselves on keeping away from all contact with what they termed ‘ la politique ’ , except on the day of the elections , or even on that day too ; others looked upon their local deputy as a sort of servant , a being created and put into the world specially to serve their own private interests . The only feeling which tempered the contempt for public affairs was the party spirit , at any rate among such as had caught this disease . One would seek in vain to find a single aspect of public life that was able to arouse in the French the remotest feelings of loyalty , gratitude or affection . In the heyday of laical enthusiasm , there had been public education ; but for a long time now education has ceased to be anything , both in the eyes of parents and children alike , except a machine for producing diplomas , in other words , jobs . As to items of social legislation , never had the French people , to the extent to which their appetite in that direction was satisfied , regarded them as other than concessions extorted from niggardly authorities as a direct result of bringing violent pressure to bear . No other interest replaced the one lacking for public affairs . Each successive régime having destroyed at an ever-increasing rate local and regional life , it had finally ceased to exist . France was like a dying man whose members are already cold , and whose heart alone goes on beating . Hardly anywhere was there any real throb of life except in Paris ; but even there , as soon as you reached the suburbs , an atmosphere of moral decay began to make itself felt . In those outwardly peaceful days before the war , the ennui of the little French provincial towns constituted perhaps as real a form of cruelty as that of more visible atrocities . Isn ’ t it as cruel to condemn human beings to spend those unique , irreplaceable years between the cradle and the grave in a dismal atmosphere of ennui , as to have them starved or massacred ? It was Richelieu who started throwing this pall of ennui over France , and since his time the atmosphere has only grown stuffier and stuffier . When war broke out , a state of asphyxiation had been reached . If the State has morally killed everything , territorially speaking , smaller than itself , it has also turned territorial frontiers into prison walls to lock up people ’ s thoughts . As soon as one examines history a little closely , and outside of the ordinary manuals , one is amazed to see to what extent certain periods almost without material means of communication surpassed ours in the wealth , variety , fertility and vitality of their exchanges of thought over the very widest expanses . That is the case with the Middle Ages , pre-Roman antiquity , the period immediately preceding historical times . In our day , with our wireless , aeroplanes , latest developments in transport of all kinds , printing and the press , the modern phenomenon of the nation keeps shut up in separate little compartments even so naturally universal a thing as Science . Frontiers , of course , are not impassable ; but just as they subject the traveller to an unending series of irritating and laborious formalities , so in the same way all contact with foreign ways of thinking , in no matter what sphere , demands a mental effort in order to get across the frontier . The effort required is considerable , and quite a number of people are not prepared to make it . Even in the case of those who do , the fact that such an effort has to be made prevents the formation of organic links across the frontiers . It is true that there are international Churches and parties . But as for the Churches , they offer us the supreme scandal of clergy and faithful asking God at the same time , with the same rites , the same words , and it must be supposed , an equal amount of faith and purity of heart , to grant a military victory to one or other of two warring camps . This shocking spectacle has been going on for a long time ; but in our century religious life has been subordinated to that of the nation as never before . And as for parties , their internationalism is either a pure fiction , or else it takes the form of a total subserviency to one particular nation . Lastly , the State has also broken all the bonds which could , outside the sphere of public life , provide a goal for the exercise of loyalty . Much as the French Revolution did , by suppressing the trades-corporations , to encourage technical progress , morally speaking it created a corresponding amount of evil , or at any rate finally sealed an evil already partly accomplished . It can not be too often repeated that nowadays , whenever people refer to such organizations , in no matter what circles , the last thing they have in mind is anything resembling the old trades-corporations . Once the trades-corporations had disappeared , labour became , in the individual lives of men , a means whose corresponding end was money . There is somewhere in the Charter of the League of Nations a sentence declaring that henceforth labour shall no longer be regarded as a commodity . It was a joke in the worst possible taste . We live in an age when a host of worthy people , who judge themselves to be very far removed from what Lévy-Bruhl called the pre-logical mentality , have believed in the magical efficacy of words far more than any savage from the depths of Australia ever did . When you take some indispensable commercial product off the market , you have to arrange for it to be distributed in some other way . Nothing of the kind was attempted in connexion with labour , which , naturally , has continued being a commodity . Hence , professional loyalty becomes merely a form of commercial honesty . In a society founded on exchange , the heaviest form of social reprobation falls on robbery and swindling , and especially swindling by a dealer who sells poor quality goods guaranteeing them all the time to be first-class . Accordingly , when one sells one ’ s labour , honesty demands that one should furnish goods of a quality corresponding to the price paid . But honesty is not the same as loyalty . A wide distance separates these two virtues . A strong current of loyalty flows through working-class association , which was for a long time the dominant impulse behind trade-union activity . But several obstacles have prevented this loyalty from forming a solid buttress to moral life . On the one hand , the commercial side of social life has penetrated into the working-class movement , by wage questions being given first place ; and the more questions of money dominate , the quicker the spirit of loyalty disappears . On the other hand , to the extent to which the working-class movement is a revolutionary one , it has escaped from this drawback , but has acquired the weaknesses inherent in all forms of rebellion . Richelieu , some of whose observations are so extraordinarily lucid , declares having learnt from experience that , all other things being equal , rebels are always half as strong as the defenders of official power . Even if people think they are upholding a good cause , the feeling that they are in rebellion weakens them . Without some psychological mechanism of this sort , there could be no stability about human societies . This mechanism explains the firm hold obtained by the Communist Party . Revolutionary workmen are only too thankful to have a State at the back of them—a State which gives an official character , legitimacy and reality to their actions that only a State can confer , and which at the same time is situated too far away from them , geographically , to be able to disgust them . In just the same way , the Encyclopédistes , feeling deeply uncomfortable at finding themselves in conflict with their own ruler , showed desperate anxiety to obtain the favour of the rulers of Prussia and Russia . One can also understand , making use of this analogy , why more or less revolutionary workmen who had resisted the attraction of Russian prestige were not able to prevent themselves succumbing to the German variety . Apart from those who have given themselves entirely to the Communist Party , workmen can not find in loyalty towards their own class a sufficiently concrete , sufficiently clearly defined aim to satisfy their need of inner stability . Few notions are so vague as that of social class . Marx , who built up the whole of his system upon it , never attempted to define it , nor even simply to investigate it . The only information to be extracted from his works on the subject of social classes is that they are things which engage in strife . That is not enough . Besides , it is not one of those notions which , without being able to be defined in words , are clear to the mind . It is even harder to conceive it or feel it without some definition than it is to define it . The loyalty implicit in adherence to some religious form also counts little enough—strange though this may be—in modern life . In spite of great and obvious differences , a result which is in a sense analogous is produced by the English system of a national Church and the French system of the separation of Churches and State . Only the latter seems the more destructive . Religion has been proclaimed a private affair . According to present-day habits of mind , this doesn ’ t mean that it resides in the secret places of the soul , in that inner sanctuary where even the individual conscience doesn ’ t penetrate . It means that it is a matter of choice , opinion , taste , almost of caprice , something like the choice of a political party , or even that of a tie ; or else that it is a matter to do with one ’ s family , education , personal surroundings . Having become a private concern , it has lost the obligatory character associated with public manifestations , and consequently can no longer lay claim to loyalty unchallenged . A number of revealing remarks show that this is so . How often , for instance , we hear the following commonplace repeated : ‘ Whether Catholics , Protestants , Jews or Free-Thinkers , we ’ re all Frenchmen , ’ exactly as though it were a question of small territorial fragments of the country , as who should say : ‘ Whether from Marseilles , Lyons or Paris , we ’ re all Frenchmen. ’ In a document promulgated by the Pope , one may read : ‘ Not only from the Christian point of view ; but , more generally , from the human point of view … ’ , as though the Christian point of view—which either has no meaning at all , or else claims to encompass everything in this world and the next—possessed a smaller degree of generality than the human point of view . It is impossible to conceive a more terrible admission of religious bankruptcy . That is how the anathema sit have to be paid for . To sum up , religion , degraded to the rank of a private matter , reduces itself to the choice of a place in which to spend an hour or two every Sunday morning . What is comical about the situation is that religion , that is to say , Man ’ s relationship to God , is not nowadays regarded as too sacred a matter to be interfered with by any outside authority , but is placed among the things which the State leaves to each one ’ s own particular fancy , as being of small importance from the point of view of public affairs . At least , that has been the case in the recent past , and that is the contemporary meaning attached to the word ‘ tolerance ’ . Thus there exists nothing , apart from the State , to which loyalty can cling ; which is why up to 1940 loyalty had not been withdrawn from it . For men feel that there is something hideous about a human existence devoid of loyalty . Amidst the general debasement of all words in the French vocabulary which have anything to do with moral concepts , the words traître and trahison have lost none of their forcefulness . Men feel also that they are born for sacrifice ; and the only form of sacrifice remaining in the public imagination was military sacrifice , that is , a sacrifice offered to the State . Indeed , all that was left was the State . The ideal of the Nation , in the sense in which the men of 1789 or 1792 understood the word , which then used to bring tears of joy to people ’ s eyes—all that belonged irremediably to the past . Even the word nation had changed its meaning . In our day , it no longer denotes the sovereign people , but the sum total of peoples recognizing the authority of the same State ; it is the political structure created by a State and the country under its control . When one talks about national sovereignty nowadays , all it really means is the sovereignty of the State . A conversation between a contemporary of ours and a man of 1792 would lead to some highly comic misunderstandings . For not only is the State in question not the sovereign people , but it is the very self-same inhuman , brutal , bureaucratic , police-ridden State bequeathed by Richelieu to Louis XIV , by Louis XIV to the Convention , by the Convention to the Empire , and by the Empire to the Third Republic . And what is more , it is instinctively recognized and hated as such . Thus we have witnessed this strange spectacle—a State , the object of hatred , repugnance , derision , disdain and fear , which , under the name of patrie , demanded absolute loyalty , total selfabnegation , the supreme sacrifice , and obtained them , from 1914 to 1918 , to an extent which surpassed all expectations . It set itself up as an absolute value in this world , that is , as an object of idolatry ; and it was accepted and served as such , honoured with the sacrifice of an appalling number of human lives . A loveless idolatry—what could be more monstrous , more heartrending ? When anybody goes much further in his devotion than his heart prompts him to do , a violent reaction , a sort of revulsion of feeling sets in later on inevitably . This is frequently observable in families where an invalid requires things to be done for him which exceed the affection he inspires . His relatives harbour a resentment which is suppressed as too unworthy to admit , but which is ever-present , like some secret poison . That is exactly what happened between Frenchmen and France , after 1918 . They had given too much to France , more than they had it in them to give to her . All the flow of anti-patriotic , pacifist and internationalist ideas after 1918 claimed to be in the name of those killed in the war and the veterans ; and in the case of the latter , a good deal of it really had its source among themselves . There were also , it is true , extremely patriotic veterans ’ associations . But the expression of their patriotism had a hollow ring , and was lacking altogether in persuasive force . It reminded one of the language of people who , having suffered too much , continually feel the need to remind themselves that they haven ’ t suffered in vain . For too high a degree of suffering in relation to what the heart prompts can produce one or other of two attitudes : either the violent rejection of the object to which too much has been sacrificed , or else the clinging to it in a sort of despair . Nothing did more harm to patriotism than the reminder , repeated ad nauseam , of the part played by the police behind the battle front . Nothing was more calculated to wound the susceptibilities of Frenchmen , by pointing out to them , standing behind their country , that police-ridden State , the traditional object of their hatred . At the same time , extracts from the sensational press during the war years , read over again later on quite calmly and with appropriate feelings of disgust , and connected up with the rôle of the police , left them with the impression that they had been hoaxed . There is nothing that a Frenchman is less able to forgive . Since the very words which expressed patriotic feeling had become discredited , the feeling itself became relegated , in a sense , to the category of feelings one is ashamed to talk about . There was a time , not so long ago either , when to have expressed patriotic sentiments in working-class circles—at least , in some of them—would have seemed to those present like a breach of propriety . All the evidence points to the fact that the most courageous soldiers in 1940 were veterans of the previous war . One can only conclude that their post-1918 reactions had a deeper influence over the minds of their children than over their own . This is a very frequent phenomenon and quite easy to understand . Those who were eighteen in 1914 had had their characters formed in the years preceding the war . It has been said that the schools at the beginning of the century had formed a generation for victory , and that those after 1918 turned out a beaten one . There is undoubtedly a lot of truth in this . Still , the schoolmasters from 1918 onwards were mostly veterans , and very many children who reached the age of ten between 1920 and 1930 must have had such men as teachers . If the effect of this reaction was felt in France more than in other countries , this was because of a far more acute form of uprootedness there , resulting from a far older and more intense form of State centralization , the demoralizing effects of victory , and the complete licence allowed in the field of propaganda . The balance was also upset in regard to the notion of patriotism , but compensated in an inverse sense , this compensation taking place in the realm of pure speculation . Owing to the fact that the State had remained , in the midst of a total void , the only reality entitled to demand of Man his loyalty and sacrifice , the notion of patriotism presented itself to the mind as an absolute value . The country was beyond good and evil . It is what is expressed in the English saying : ‘ Right or wrong , my country ’ .28 But people often go farther . They refuse to admit that their country can ever be wrong . However small the inclination of men of all classes may be for making an effort of critical examination , a patent absurdity , even if they refuse it conscious recognition , throws them into a state of uneasiness which weakens the spirit . In reality , nothing is more mixed up with ordinary , daily human affairs than philosophy , but it is an implied philosophy . To posit one ’ s country as an absolute value that can not be defiled by evil is manifestly absurd . Country is merely another name for nation ; and the nation is a self-contained unit composed of various territorial areas and peoples assembled together as a result of historical events in which chance has played a great part , so far as human intelligence is able to judge , and where good and evil are always mingled with one another . The nation is a fact , and a fact is not an absolute value . It is just one fact amongst other similar facts . More than one nation exists on the earth ’ s surface . Ours is certainly unique . But each of the others , considered by itself and with affection , is unique in the same degree . It was the fashion before 1940 to talk about ‘ eternal France ’ . Such words are a sort of blasphemy . One is compelled to say the same about the moving pages which have been written by great French Catholic writers on the vocation of France , the eternal salvation of France and other similar themes . Richelieu showed a much clearer perception when he said that the salvation of States was only brought about in this world . France is something which is temporal , terrestrial . Unless I am mistaken , it has never been suggested that Christ died to save nations . The idea of a nation being chosen by God for itself simply belongs to the old Mosaic law . So-called pagan antiquity would never have blundered into so gross a confusion . The Romans regarded themselves as specially chosen , but solely for world dominion . They were not concerned with the next world . Nowhere does it appear that any city , or people , should have thought itself chosen for a supernatural destiny . The Mysteries which represented , to a certain extent , the official road to salvation , as the Churches do today , were local institutions , but recognized as being on an equal footing among themselves . Plato describes how Man , assisted by the power of grace , passes out of the cavern of this world ; but he doesn ’ t say that a whole city can pass out of it . On the contrary , he depicts the collectivity as something animal , which hinders the soul ’ s salvation . Antiquity is often accused of having only been able to recognize collective values . In fact , this mistake was only made by the Romans , who were atheists , and by the Hebrews ; and in the latter case , only up to the time of the Babylonian exile . But if it is wrong to attribute this mistake to pre-Christian antiquity , it is also wrong not to recognize that we are continually committing it ourselves , corrupted as we are by the dual Roman-Hebrew tradition , which all too often carries the day with us as against pure Christian inspiration . Christians today find it awkward to have to recognize that , if the word patriotism is used in its strongest possible sense , its complete sense , a Christian has only one country that can be the object of such patriotism , and which is situated outside this world . For he has but one Patros , who lives outside this world . ‘ Lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven … for where your treasure is , there will your heart be also. ’ It is therefore forbidden to have one ’ s heart on this earth . Christians today don ’ t like raising the question of the respective rights over their heart enjoyed by God and their country . The German bishops ended one of their most courageous protests by saying that they refused ever to have to make a choice between God and Germany . And why did they refuse to do this ? Circumstances can always arise which make it necessary to choose between God and no matter what earthly object , and the choice must never be in doubt . But the French bishops would not have expressed themselves any differently . Joan of Arc ’ s popularity during the past quarter of a century was not an altogether healthy business ; it was a convenient way of forgetting that there is a difference between France and God . Yet this lack of inward courage to challenge the accepted notion of patriotism didn ’ t make for greater energy in patriotic performance . Joan of Arc ’ s statue was occupying a prominent place in every church throughout the country , all through those terrible days when Frenchmen abandoned France to her fate . ‘ If any man come to me , and hate not his father and mother , and wife , and children , and brethren , and sisters , yea , and his own life also , he can not be my disciple. ’ If it is commanded to hate all that , using the word ‘ hate ’ in a certain sense , it is certainly forbidden also to love one ’ s country , using the word ‘ love ’ in a certain sense . For the proper object of love is goodness , and ‘ God alone is good ’ . Such facts are self-evident , but , by some magic spell or other , go altogether unrecognized in our age . Otherwise it would have been impossible for a man like Father de Foucauld—who , out of charity , had chosen to bear witness to Christ among non-Christian populations—to consider that he had the right at the same time to supply the Deuxième Bureau with information on the subject of these same populations . It would be salutary for us to ponder the devil ’ s terrible words with reference to the kingdoms of this world , as he showed them all to Christ : ‘ All this power … is delivered unto me . … ’ Not a single kingdom is excepted . What didn ’ t shock the Christians shocked the workmen . A tradition still sufficiently recent so as not to be quite dead , makes the love of justice the central inspiration behind the French working-class movement . During the first half of the nineteenth century it was a passionate love , which took the side of the oppressed all over the world . As long as the People constituted as a sovereign nation were synonymous with the Country , no problem arose concerning their relationship to justice . For it was agreed—quite arbitrarily , and on the flimsiest interpretation of the Contrat Social—that a sovereign nation doesn ’ t commit acts of injustice towards either its members or its neighbours ; it being supposed that the causes making for injustice were all bound up with the non-existence of the sovereign nation . But as soon as , behind the country , there stands the old State , justice is far away . In the modern form of patriotism , justice hasn ’ t much of a part to play , and above all nothing is said which might encourage any relationship between patriotism and justice to be drawn . One dare not assert that there is an equivalence between the two conceptions ; one wouldn ’ t dare , in particular , make such an assertion before a gathering of workmen , who , beneath their social oppression , feel the State ’ s cold , metallic touch , and realize in a confused sort of way that the same cold touch must prevail in international relations . When a lot is talked about patriotism , little is heard about justice ; and the sense of justice is so strong amongst workmen , even if they are materialists , owing to the fact that they are always under the impression they are being deprived of it , that any form of moral education in which justice hardly figures can not possibly exercise any hold over them . When they die for France , they always need to feel that at the same time they are dying for something very much greater , taking part in the universal struggle against injustice . For them , to use a now famous expression , patriotism is not enough . The same thing applies wherever a flame , a spark , however indistinct , of truly spiritual life burns . By its light , patriotism is not enough . And for those in whom this light is absent , patriotism , in its highest aspects , is far too exalted ; it can then only constitute a sufficiently strong incentive in the form of the blindest national fanaticism . It is true that men are capable of dividing their minds into compartments , in each of which an idea lives a sort of life of its own , undisturbed by other ideas . They don ’ t care for either critical or synthetical effort , and won ’ t submit to making either , unless obliged . But in situations of fear , anguish , when the flesh draws back before the prospect of death , or too great a degree of suffering or danger , in the mind of every man , even if he is completely uneducated , a manufacturer of arguments suddenly stands forth , who elaborates proofs to demonstrate why it is legitimate and right to avoid that particular death , suffering or danger . Such proofs can be either good or bad , depending on the particular case . At all events , at the time , the body ’ s disturbed condition gives them an intensity of persuasive force that no orator has ever succeeded in acquiring . There are people to whom things do not happen in this way . That is either because their natures protect them from fear , that their flesh , blood and bowels remain unaffected by the presence of death or suffering ; or else because their minds have attained such a degree of unity that this manufacturer of arguments has no opportunity of getting to work in them . With others , again , he is able to get to work , and makes his arguments felt , but they are scorned nevertheless . That in itself presupposes either an already high degree of inward unity , or else powerful outward incentives . Hitler ’ s profound remark on the subject of propaganda , namely that brute force is unable to prevail over ideas if it is alone , but that it easily manages to do so by taking unto itself a few ideas of no matter how base a nature , provides also the key to the inner life . The tumults of the flesh , however violent they may be , can not prevail over a thought in the mind , if they act alone . But their victory is an easy one if they communicate their persuasive force to some other thought , however inferior it may be . That is the important point . No thought is of too inferior a quality for this rôle of ally of the flesh . But the flesh needs thought of some kind as an ally . That is why , whereas in normal times people—even cultured ones—live , without the slightest inconvenience , with the most colossal inward contradictions , in times of supreme crisis the least flaw in the realm of consciousness acquires the same importance as if the most lucid of philosophers were at hand , maliciously ready to take advantage of the fact ; and this happens to everybody , however ignorant he or she may be . In times of greatest stress , which are not necessarily those of greatest danger , but those when Man finds himself , in face of the tumult raging in his flesh and blood and bowels , alone and bereft of all outward support , those whose inward lives depend entirely on one idea are the only ones capable of resisting . Which is why totalitarian systems form men able to withstand anything . Patriotism can only become a single idea of this sort in a régime of the Hitlerian type . This could easily be proved , in detail , but it isn ’ t worth while since the evidence is so overwhelming . If patriotism is not such an idea , and yet , all the same , has a part to play , then either there must exist disorder in the inward consciousness , and some hidden weakness of the spirit , or else there must be some other idea , dominating all the rest , and in relation to which patriotism has a perfectly clearly recognized rôle , but a limited and subordinate one . This latter was not the case under the Third Republic—not in any class of society . What there was everywhere was moral incoherence ; which is why a pet argument manufacturer was busy in everybody ’ s mind between 1914 and 1918 . Most people resisted by making a supreme effort , thanks to that sort of reaction which often encourages men to rush blindly , through fear of bringing dishonour upon themselves , to the opposite extreme to that to which fear urges them . But when the mind is exposed to danger and suffering as a result of obeying this impulse alone , it quickly becomes worn out . The agonized arguments which were unable to bring their influence to bear on personal conduct , go gnawing away all the more surely in the very depths of the mind , and make their influence felt retrospectively . That is what happened after 1918 . And those who had not made any sacrifice and were ashamed of it were very quick , for other reasons , to catch the infection . In such an atmosphere were children brought up who , a little later on , were to be asked to go out and die . One can realize how far this inward disintegration had proceeded with the French , when one reflects that even today29 the idea of collaboration with the enemy is not entirely out of favour . On the other hand , if encouragement is sought in the spectacle of the Resistance , if one tells oneself that the resisters find no difficulty at all in deriving inspiration from patriotism and from a host of other motives , one must at the same time go on reminding oneself that France , as a nation , finds herself at the moment on the side of justice , the general good and things of that kind , that is to say , among the beautiful things which don ’ t exist . The allied victory will take her out of this category , and put her back into the realm of facts ; many difficulties which seemed to be disposed of will reappear . In a sense , affliction simplifies everything . The fact that France entered along the path of resistance more slowly , later than most of the other occupied countries , shows that it would be a mistake to be without apprehensions as to the future . One can see clearly to what a point of moral incoherence our régime had attained if one considers the schools . Moral philosophy forms part of the curriculum , and even those teachers who didn ’ t care to make it the subject of dogmatic teaching , taught it inevitably in a diffuse sort of way . And the central conception of morals is justice and the obligations it imposes towards one ’ s neighbour . But when it is a question of history , morals ceases to play any part . The question is never raised as to France ’ s obligations abroad . Sometimes she is referred to as being just and generous , as though that were something supererogatory , a feather in her cap , a crown to her glory . The conquests she has made and then allowed to slip from her grasp can , perhaps , be regarded with a certain doubt , like those of Napoleon ; but never the ones she has managed to hold on to . The past is nothing else but the story of France ’ s growth , and it is considered that this growth must necessarily be a good thing from every point of view . No one ever asks himself whether in the course of her growth she hasn ’ t brought about destruction . To look into the possibility of her having at some time or another destroyed things which were worth as much as she would seem the most appalling blasphemy . Bernanos says that the people of Action Française30 look upon France as a prime baby who has only to grow and put on flesh to satisfy his parents ’ every wish . But there are others besides them . It is the general opinion which , without ever being expressed , is always implied in the way in which the country ’ s past history is regarded . And , besides , the comparison with a baby is too flattering . The living things that are only asked to put on flesh are rabbits , pigs and chickens . Plato found the right expression when he compared the collectivity to an animal . And those who are blinded by its prestige , which means every one except for a few predestined individuals , ‘ call just and beautiful the things that are necessary , being incapable of discerning and teaching what a distance separates the essence of what is necessary from the essence of what is good ’ . Everything is done to make children feel—not that they don ’ t feel it naturally—that things concerning the country , the nation , the nation ’ s growth have a degree of importance which sets them apart from other things . And it is precisely in regard to those things that justice , consideration for others , strict obligations assigning limits to ambitions and appetites—all that moral teaching one is trying to instill into the lives of little boys—never get mentioned . What conclusion is there to be drawn other than that morals are among the number of less important things , which , like religion , a trade , the choice of a doctor or a grocer , belong to the lower plane of private life ? But with morals , properly speaking , thus relegated to a lower plane , no other system is advanced as a substitute . For the superior prestige of the nation is bound up with the exaltation of war . It furnishes no motives for action in peacetime , except in a régime which constitutes a permanent preparation for war , like the Nazi régime . Save in such a régime as the latter , it would be dangerous to remind people too much that this country of theirs which asks its children to lay down their lives has a reverse side—the State , with its taxes , customs , police . This is carefully avoided , and so it never occurs to anybody that to hate the police or defraud the customs and income-tax authorities is to display a lack of patriotism . A country like England forms to a certain extent an exception , on account of a centuries-old tradition of liberty guaranteed by the authorities . Thus , this dual system or morals , in time of peace , weakens the power of the unchanging moral law , without putting anything in its place . This duality is present at all time , everywhere , and not only in the schools . For nearly every day , in normal times , when a Frenchman reads the paper , discusses things at home or in the local bistrot , he is moved to think for France , in the name of France . From that moment , and until he enters again into his own private self , he loses even all recollection of the virtues which , in a more or less vague and abstract way , he recognizes it is his personal duty to practise . When it is a question of oneself , and even of one ’ s family , it is a more or less recognized thing that one mustn ’ t be too boastful ; that one must beware of one ’ s judgments when one is at the same time judge and prosecutor ; that one must ask oneself whether opposition on the part of others may not be at least partly justified ; that one mustn ’ t try to occupy the whole stage , or think solely of oneself ; in short , that limits must be set to egoism and pride . But when it comes to national egoism , national pride , not only is the field unlimited , but the highest possible degree of it seems to be imposed by something closely resembling an obligation . Regard for others , recognition of one ’ s own faults , modesty , the voluntary limitation of one ’ s desires—all are now turned into so many crimes , so many sacrileges . Among several sublime sentiments which the Egyptian Book of the Dead puts into the mouth of the just man after death , perhaps the most moving is the following : ‘ I have never turned a deaf ear to just and true words ’ . But in international affairs , every one regards it as a sacred duty to turn a deaf ear to just and true words , if they go contrary to the interests of France . Or else , do we admit that words contrary to the interests of France can never be just and true ones ? That would come to exactly the same thing . There are certain errors of taste which good breeding , in the absence of morality , prevents people from falling into in private life , and which seem perfectly natural on a national scale . Even the most odious of patronesses would hesitate to assemble together all their protégés to remind them of the huge benefits they had received and of the corresponding gratitude they owed in return . But a French Governor of Indo-China doesn ’ t hesitate , in the name of France , to talk in that fashion , even immediately after the most atrocious acts of repression or the most scandalous famines ; and he expects to hear himself echoed , and , indeed , insists upon it . This is a custom inherited from the Romans . They never committed any acts of cruelty , never granted any favours , without boasting in each case of their generosity and clemency . No one was ever received in audience , no matter what the subject might be , even a simple alleviation of some terrible form of oppression , without first beginning by the familiar catalogue of praise . In this way they brought dishonour upon entreaty , which before then had been an honourable act , by burdening it with lies and flattery . In the Iliad , you never find a Trojan on his knees before a Greek and imploring for his life , putting the remotest trace of flattery in his words . Our patriotism comes straight from the Romans . That is why French children are encouraged to seek inspiration for it in Corneille . It is a pagan virtue , if these two words are compatible . The word pagan , when applied to Rome , really possesses the significance charged with horror which the early Christian controversialists gave it . The Romans really were an atheistic and idolatrous people ; not idolatrous with regard to images made of stone or bronze , but idolatrous with regard to themselves . It is this idolatry of self which they have bequeathed to us in the form of patriotism . This duality in the moral sphere is a far more appalling scandal if , instead of lay morality , one thinks of the Christian virtues , of which lay morality is in any case simply an edition for general public use , a diluted solution . The essential fact about the Christian virtues , what lends them a special savour of their own , is humility—the freely accepted movement towards the bottom . It is through this that the saints resemble Christ . ‘ Who , being in the form of God , thought it not robbery to be equal with God . … He humbled himself . … Though he were a Son , yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered. ’ 31 But when a Frenchman thinks about France , pride , for him , is a duty , according to present notions ; humility would be a betrayal . It is this betrayal which is perhaps what the Vichy Government is most bitterly reproached with . People are right in that , for its humility is of a debased kind ; it is that of the slave who cringes and lies to avoid receiving blows . But in matters of this sort , a humility of a really high order is something unknown to us . We can not even conceive such a thing possible . In order merely to be able to conceive it , we should have to make a special effort of the imagination . In the soul of a Christian , the presence of the pagan virtue of patriotism acts as a dissolvent . We received it from the hands of Rome without giving it baptism . It is strange to reflect that the barbarians , or those who were so named , were baptized almost without any difficulty at the time of the invasions ; but the heritage of ancient Rome never was , no doubt because it was impossible for it to be , and that in spite of the fact that the Roman Empire turned Christianity into a State religion . It would be difficult , moreover , to imagine a more cruel injury . As for the barbarians , it is not surprising that the Goths accepted Christianity without difficulty , if , as their contemporaries thought , they were of the same blood as those Getae , the noblest of the Thracians , whom Herodotus calls immortalizers because of their intense faith in eternal life . The barbarian heritage became mingled with the Christian spirit to form that unique , inimitable , perfectly homogeneous product known as chivalry . But between the spirit of Rome and that of Christ there has never been any fusion . If fusion had been possible , the Apocalypse would have lied in representing Rome as the woman seated on the beast , the woman full of the names of blasphemy . The Renaissance was first of all a resurrection of the Greek spirit and then of the Roman spirit . It is only in this second stage that it acted as a dissolvent of Christianity . It is in the course of this second stage that there came into being the modern form of nationality , the modern form of patriotism . Corneille was right to dedicate his Horace to Richelieu , and to do so in terms whose baseness provides a suitable accompaniment to the almost delirious pride which permeates this tragedy . Such baseness and such pride are inseparable : we see that well enough in Germany today . Corneille himself is an excellent example of the sort of asphyxia which seizes Christian morality when it comes into contact with the Roman spirit . His Polyeucte would seem to us comical if habit had not blinded us . Polyeucte , according to his version , is a man who suddenly realizes that there is a far more glorious kingdom to conquer than any of a terrestrial kind , and that a particular technique exists for doing so . He immediately feels obliged to set out on this conquest , without giving a thought to anything else , and in the same frame of mind as when he used formerly to wage war in the service of the Emperor . Alexander wept , we are told , because he had only the terrestrial globe to conquer . Corneille apparently thought Christ had come down to earth to make up for this deficiency . If patriotism acts invisibly as a dissolvent of morality , whether Christian or lay , in time of peace , the contrary takes place in wartime ; and this is perfectly natural . Where there is a moral duality , it is always the morality the actual circumstances require that suffers injury . The line of least resistance naturally gives the advantage to the type of morality which , in point of fact , there is no need to exercise : a war morality in peacetime , a peace morality in wartime . In peacetime , justice and truth , because of the water-tight compartment separating them individually from patriotism , are degraded to the rank of purely private virtues , such as for example politeness ; but when the country demands the supreme sacrifice , this very separation deprives patriotism of that total validity which alone can call forth a total effort . When one has got into the habit of considering as an absolute good , free of any shadow of doubt , this growth in the course of which France devoured and digested so many lands , is it surprising that propaganda inspired by precisely the same idea , and only substituting the name of Europe in place of that of France , should be able to penetrate into a corner of the mind ? Present-day patriotism consists in an equation between absolute good and a collectivity corresponding to a given territorial area , namely France ; any one who changes in his mind the territorial term of the equation , and substitutes for it a smaller term , such as Brittany , or a larger term , such as Europe , is looked upon as a traitor . Why ? It is all perfectly arbitrary . Habit makes it impossible for us to realize how exceedingly arbitrary it is . But at a time of supreme crisis , this arbitrary notion offers a hold to the manufacturer of sophistries inside us . The present collaborators32 have as regards the new Europe which a German victory would create the same attitude the inhabitants of Provence , Brittany , Alsace and Franche-Comté are expected to have towards the past , so far as the conquest of their country by the king of France is concerned . Why should the difference between these two historical periods change what is good and what is bad ? Between 1918 and 1919 one would frequently hear worthy people who looked forward to peace argue as follows : ‘ Formerly , provinces used to go to war with one another , then they became united and formed themselves into nations . In the same way the nations are going to unite in each continent , then throughout the whole world , and that will be the end of all war ’ . It was a very widely held platitude , and derived from that type of reasoning by extrapolation which exercised such an influence in the nineteenth century and was carried over into the twentieth . The good people who talked thus had a general idea of the history of France , but they didn ’ t pause to think , when they were speaking , that the national unity had been brought about almost exclusively by the most brutal conquests . Yet if they did remember this in 1939 , they must also have remembered that those conquests had always seemed to them a good thing . Is it surprising , therefore , that with a part at least of their mind they should have thought : ‘ For the purposes of progress and the fulfilment of History , it may be we have to pass through this experience ’ ? They can well have said to themselves : ‘ France was victorious in 1918 ; she was unable to bring about European unity . Now Germany is trying to do so ; we mustn ’ t interfere with her ’ . The cruelties accompanying the German system ought , it is true , to have stopped them . But they may either not have heard anything about them , or supposed them to have been invented by a lying propaganda , or regarded them as of little importance , because the victims were peoples of inferior category . Is it not just as easy to be ignorant of the cruelties of the Germans towards the Jews or the Czechs as it is of those of the French towards the Annamites ? Péguy used to say : Blessed are they who die in a just war . It must follow that those who kill them unjustly are cursed . If it is true that the French soldiers of 1914 died in a just war , then it must certainly also be true , to at least the same extent , for Vercingetorix . If one thinks thus , what must one ’ s feelings be towards the man who kept him chained up in a dungeon , in complete darkness , for six years , and then offered him as a public spectacle to the Romans before finally cutting his throat ? But Péguy was a fervent admirer of the Roman Empire . If one admires the Roman Empire , why be angry with Germany which is trying to reconstitute it on a vaster scale by the use of almost identical methods ? This didn ’ t stop Péguy from going to his death in 1914 . But it is this contradiction , though unformulated , unrecognized , which stopped a good many young men in 1940 from facing the enemy fire in the same spirit as Péguy . Either conquest is always an evil thing , or it is always a good thing , or again it is sometimes a good , sometimes an evil thing . In this last case , a criterion is needed for judging . To suggest as a criterion that conquest is a good thing when it increases the power of the nation to which one belongs by the accident of birth , an evil thing when it diminishes this power , is something so entirely contrary to reason that it can only be acceptable to people who , of their own accord and once and for all , have banished reason altogether , as is the case with Germany . But Germany is able to do this , because she lives by a romantic tradition . France is not , because her attachment to reason forms part of the national heritage . A certain proportion of Frenchmen may well declare themselves hostile towards Christianity ; but , before as after 1789 , all movements in the realm of ideas which have taken place in France have claimed to be based on reason . It is impossible for France to set aside reason in the name of patriotism . That is why France feels uncomfortable in her patriotism , in spite of the fact that it was she who , in the eighteenth century , invented the modern form of patriotism . It must not be imagined that what has been called the universal vocation of France renders a conciliation between patriotism and universal values easier for Frenchmen than for other people . It is , indeed , the contrary which is true . It is more difficult for Frenchmen , because they are unable completely to succeed in either suppressing the second term of the contradiction , or separating the two terms by a water-tight compartment . They find this contradiction within their own patriotism . But because of this they are as it were obliged to invent a new sort of patriotism . If they do so , they will be fulfilling what has been up to a point , in the past , the function of France , namely , to think out what it is the world requires . The world requires at the present time a new patriotism . And it is now that this inventive effort must be made , just when patriotism is something which is causing bloodshed . We mustn ’ t wait until it has become once more just a subject for conversation in drawing-rooms , learned societies and open-air cafés . It is easy to say , with Lamartine : ‘ Ma patrie est partout où rayonne la France … La vérité , c ’ est mon pays. ’ Unfortunately , this would only make sense if France and truth were synonymous . France sometimes resorts to lying and committing injustice ; this has happened , is happening and will happen again . For France is not God , not by a long chalk . Christ alone was able to say : ‘ I am the truth ’ . No one else on this earth has the right to say that , whether speaking as an individual or in the name of a collectivity , but with far less reason still in the latter case . For it is possible for a man to attain such a degree of holiness that it is no longer he who lives , but Christ in him . Whereas there is no such thing as an holy nation . There was once a nation which believed itself to be holy , with the direst consequences for its well-being ; and in connexion with this , it is strange indeed to reflect that the Pharisees were the resisters in this nation , and the publicans the collaborators , and then to remind oneself what were Christ ’ s relations with each of these two national groups . This would seem to oblige us to consider that our resistance would be a spiritually dangerous , even a spiritually harmful , position , if amidst the motives which inspire it we did not manage to restrain the patriotic motive within the necessary bounds . It is precisely this danger which , in the extremely clumsy phraseology of our time , is meant by those who , sincerely or not , say they are afraid this movement may turn into something Fascist ; for Fascism is always intimately connected with a certain variety of patriotic feeling . France ’ s vocation in the universe can not , unless we lie to ourselves , be recalled with unmixed pride . If we lie to ourselves , we betray it in the very words with which we seek to recall it ; if we remind ourselves of the truth , shame should always temper our pride , for every historical example of it which is offered to us has its embarrassing side . In the thirteenth century , France was a centre of inspiration for the whole of Christendom . Yet it was , nevertheless , at the beginning of this century that she utterly destroyed , south of the Loire , a budding civilization which already shone with a remarkable splendour ; and it was in the course of this military operation , and in co-operation with the military power , that the Inquisition first became established . That is certainly an ineradicable blot on her reputation . The thirteenth century was the one in which Gothic replaced Romanesque , polyphonic music the Gregorian chant , and , in theology , constructions derived from Aristotle replaced Platonic sources of inspiration , hence one is at liberty to doubt whether French influence in this century amounted to any real progress . In the seventeenth century , once more , France shed her light over Europe . But the military prestige connected with this spiritual radiance was obtained by methods which any lover of justice is ashamed to mention ; besides , just in the same degree as the French classical conception produced marvellous works in the French language , so was its influence destructive in other countries . In 1789 , the hopes of all peoples were centred on France . But three years later she started going to war , and from her earliest victories onwards , her liberating expeditions became transformed into conquering ones . Without England , Russia and Spain to oppose her , she would have imposed on Europe a unity perhaps hardly less stifling than the one Germany is seeking to impose today . In the latter half of the last century , when people began to realize that Europe was not the whole world , and that there were quite a few continents on this planet , France was again seized with the desire to play a universal rôle . But all she managed to do was to carve out for herself a colonial empire copied from the British model , and in the hearts of not a few coloured peoples her name is now linked with feelings which it is unbearable to have to think about . Thus the contradiction inherent in French patriotism is visible also throughout the whole of French history . It must not be concluded from this that just because France has gone on living so long with this contradiction , she can go on doing so indefinitely . In the first place , once one has recognized a contradiction , it is disgraceful to put up with it . Then , as a matter of brute fact , France very nearly died from a crisis in French patriotism . Everything leads one to suppose that she would have died from it , but for the fact that British patriotism was , fortunately , made of sterner stuff . But we can not transfer the latter over to France . It is our own kind we have to remake . It is waiting to be remade . It is again showing signs of life because German soldiers on French soil are the very best propaganda agents for French patriotism ; only they won ’ t always be there . A terrible responsibility rests with us . For it is nothing less than a question of refashioning the soul of the country , and the temptation is so strong to do this by resorting to lies or half-lies that it requires more than ordinary heroism to remain faithful to the truth . The patriotic crisis took on a double aspect . In political parlance , one might say that there was both a Leftist and a Rightist crisis . On the Right , amongst the younger middle-class generation , the break between patriotism and morals had , in conjunction with other causes , completely discredited all morality ; but the prestige of patriotism was scarcely any greater . The attitude of mind expressed in the phrase ‘ Politique d ’ abord ’ had spread considerably further than the actual influence of Maurras . The phrase was , of course , absurd ; for politics are simply a technique , a specialized method of procedure . It is as if one were to say : ‘ Mechanics first ’ . The question which immediately poses itself is this : ‘ Politics for what ? ’ Richelieu would answer : ‘ For the greater glory of the State ’ . And why for this purpose and not for some other one ? To this question , no answer is forthcoming . That is the question which mustn ’ t be asked . So-called realist politics , handed down from Richelieu to Maurras , not without being seriously impaired on the way , only make sense if this question is not put . A simple condition exists for it not to be . When the beggar said to Talleyrand : ‘ Milord , I ’ ve got to live somehow ’ , Talleyrand replied : ‘ I don ’ t see that that is necessary ’ . But the beggar himself saw the necessity for it all right . In just the same way , Louis XIV saw well enough how necessary it was that the State should be served with blind devotion , because the State was , in fact , himself . Richelieu only looked upon himself as being the State ’ s servant No . I ; all the same , in a sense he possessed it , and for that reason identified himself with it . Richelieu ’ s political attitude only makes sense for those who , whether individually or collectively , feel either that they are masters of their country or else capable of becoming so . The younger middle-class generation could no longer , from 1924 onwards , have the feeling that France was their domain . The working-classes made far too much noise for that . Besides which , it suffered from that mysterious exhaustion that swept over France after 1918 , the causes of which were no doubt largely physical . Whether the fault is attributable to alcoholism , the nervous condition of the parents at the time their children were born and during their upbringing , or some other factor , the fact remains that for a long time now French youth has shown every indication of fatigue . German youth , even in 1932 , when the authorities were doing nothing for them , gave evidence of an incomparably greater vitality , in spite of the very hard and long-drawn-out privations they had been through . This fatigue prevented the middle-class youth in France from feeling in a condition to impose themselves on the country . Hence , to the question : ‘ Politics for what ? ’ the necessary answer was : ‘ For the purpose of being placed in power in this country by other people ’ —that is to say , people from abroad , foreigners . There was nothing in the moral code of these young people to stop them having such a desire . The shock they received in 1936 only sharpened this desire in them to an irreparably acute degree . Nobody had done them any harm ; but they had received a nasty fright , been made to eat humble pie , and , what was an unpardonable crime in their eyes , precisely by those whom they regarded as their social inferiors . In 1937 , the Italian press quoted an article from a French students ’ review in which a French girl expressed the hope that , surrounded as he was by innumerable cares of State , Mussolini would somehow find time to come and restore order in France . Whatever antipathy we may feel towards people of this class , however criminal their subsequent attitude may have been , they are human creatures , and unhappy human creatures too . The problem in their case presents itself in these terms : how to reconcile them with France without delivering her into their hands ? On the Left , that is to say , above all among the workmen and the intellectuals who lean in their direction , there are two absolutely distinct currents of opinion , although occasionally , but by no means necessarily , the two currents are found in the same person . One of these is the current emanating from French working-class tradition , which can clearly be traced back to the eighteenth century , when so many workmen read Jean-Jacques Rousseau , but which maybe has underground connexions linking it up with the first movements on behalf of communal freedom . Those who are influenced by this current alone , devote themselves entirely to the thought of justice . Unfortunately , nowadays , such a thing is rare enough among the workmen and extremely rare among the intellectuals . There are people of this sort to be found in all so-called Leftist groups—Christian , trade-unionist , anarchist , socialist , and particularly among Communist workmen , for Communist propaganda talks a lot about justice . In this it carries out the teachings of Lenin and Marx , strange as this may seem to those who have not studied all the ins and outs of the doctrine . These men all feel profoundly internationalist in time of peace , for they know that justice recognizes no national boundaries . They often feel the same even in wartime , so long as their country escapes being defeated . But their country ’ s defeat immediately causes a pure , steady flame of patriotism to light up in the depths of their consciousness . Men like this will be permanently reconciled with their country if they are offered a type of patriotism subordinated to the cause of justice . The other current is a retort to the middle-class attitude . Marxism , by offering to the working-class the supposedly scientific certainty that they will shortly become the lords and masters of the terrestrial globe , has created a working-class imperialism very similar to the nationalist imperialism . Russia has provided , as it were , the experimental proof of this , and furthermore she is being relied upon to undertake the most arduous part of the action which is to result in the overthrow of established institutions . For people who are morally exiled and in the position of immigrants , in contact above all with the repressive side of the State , and who for generations have found themselves on the border line of those social categories which provide fair game for the police , and are themselves treated as such each time the State swings over towards reaction , this offers an irresistible temptation . A huge , powerful , sovereign State , governing a territory much vaster than that of their own country , says to them : ‘ I am yours , I am your possession , your property . I exist only to serve you , and before long I will make you the undisputed masters in your own country ’ . On their side , to refuse such a friendly offer would be just about as easy as to refuse a cup of water when you haven ’ t had anything to drink for two days . Some , who made a terrific effort of self-control in order to do this , so exhausted themselves in the process that they immediately succumbed to the first exercise of pressure on the part of Germany . Many of the others are only resisting in appearance , and in reality are simply standing on one side , for fear of the risks which action necessarily brings in its train once a formal engagement has been entered into . Such people , whether numerous or otherwise , can never make up a force . The U.S.S.R. , outside Russia , is really the spiritual home of the working-class , their ‘ country ’ . In order to realize this , all one had to do was to watch the French workmen ’ s eyes as they gathered round the newspaper stalls and scanned the headlines announcing the first big Russian reverses . It was not the thought of the repercussions these defeats might have on Franco-German relations which filled their eyes with despair , for British reverses never affected them in this way . They felt they were threatened with the loss of more than France . They felt rather in the same way as the early Christians would have felt if some one had supplied them with material proofs showing Christ ’ s resurrection to have been a fiction . In a general way , there is no doubt quite a lot of resemblance between the state of mind of the early Christians and that of many Communist workmen . The latter , too , are looking forward to some approaching Day of Judgment which shall establish absolute righteousness at one single stroke and forever on this earth , and at the same time their own glory . Martyrdom came easier to the early Christians than to those of succeeding centuries , and infinitely easier than to Christ ’ s immediate disciples , who , at the moment of supreme crisis , were unable to face it . So today , sacrifice is easier for a Communist than for a Christian . Since the U.S.S.R. is a State , patriotic feeling for it is subject to the same contradictions as is patriotic feeling anywhere . But it doesn ’ t result in the same weakening . Quite the reverse . The presence of a contradiction , when it is felt , even in a dull sort of way , wears down the feelings ; when it isn ’ t felt at all , the feelings are thereby intensified , since they derive benefit at the same time from incompatible motives . Thus the U.S.S.R. has all the prestige attaching to a State , and to that cold brutality which permeates the politics of a State , especially a totalitarian one ; while at the same time it has all the prestige attaching to a champion of justice . If the contradiction is not felt , this is partly because of its remoteness , partly because it promises absolute power to all who faithfully love it . Such an expectation doesn ’ t diminish the need for justice , but renders it a blind one . As each of us considers himself sufficiently capable of practising justice , each of us naturally thinks that a system under which he wielded power would be a reasonably just one . This is the temptation Christ underwent at the hands of the devil . Men are continually succumbing to it . Although these workmen , animated by working-class imperialism , are very different from young middle-class Fascists , and make up a finer variety of humanity , the problem they pose is a similar one . How are they to be made to love their country sufficiently , without handing it over to them ? For it can ’ t be handed over to them , nor can they be given a privileged position in it ; this would be a crying injustice towards the rest of the population , and more especially the peasants . The present attitude of these workmen towards Germany must not blind us to the gravity of the problem . Germany happens to be the enemy of the U.S.S.R. Before she became so , agitation was already rife amongst them , it being a vital necessity for the Communist Party always to maintain agitation ; and it took the form of agitation ‘ against German Fascism and British Imperialism ’ . France didn ’ t appear in the picture at all . Furthermore , throughout a whole year which was a decisive one , from the summer of 1939 to the summer of 1940 , Communist influence in France was entirely directed against the country . It will not be an easy thing to induce these workmen to turn their hearts towards their country . Among the rest of the population , the crisis in the matter of patriotism has not been so acute ; it hasn ’ t gone so far as a renunciation in favour of something different ; there has merely been a sort of melting away . In the case of the peasants , this was no doubt due to the fact that they felt they were of no account in the country , except in the shape of cannon fodder to serve interests which were alien to theirs ; in that of the petits bourgeois , it must have been above all due to ennui . To all such individual causes of want of patriotism there was added a very general cause which forms as it were the reverse side of idolatry . The State had ceased to be , under the title of nation or country , something infinitely valuable in the sense of something valuable enough to be served with devotion . On the other hand , it had become in everybody ’ s eyes of unlimited value as something to be exploited . The quality of absoluteness which is bound up with idolatry remained with it , once the idolatry had ceased , and assumed this new aspect . The State appeared like an inexhaustible horn of plenty , pouring out its treasures in direct proportion to the pressure put upon it . So people always had a grudge against it for not providing more . Whatever it didn ’ t supply seemed to be as a result of a deliberate refusal on its part . When it made demands , such insistence appeared paradoxical . When it imposed its will , this became at once an intolerable act of coercion . People ’ s attitude towards the State was that of children , not towards their parents , but towards adults who are neither loved nor feared ; children always demanding something and never wanting to obey . How could people be expected to pass straightaway from such an attitude to that of unlimited devotion demanded by war ? For even after war had begun , the French believed that the State had victory tucked away somewhere in a safe place , side by side with other treasures which it wasn ’ t going to give itself the trouble to bring out . Everything was done to encourage this idea , as a slogan of the time testifies : ‘ We shall win because we ’ re the stronger ’ . Victory is going to liberate a country in which every one will have been almost exclusively occupied in disobeying , from either good or bad motives . People will have listened-in to London , read and distributed forbidden literature , travelled without a permit , hidden away supplies of corn , worked as badly as possible , done some blackmarketing , and will have boasted about all this to their friends and relations . How are people going to be made to understand that all this is finished , that henceforward they have to obey ? People will also have spent these years dreaming about eating their fill . Such dreams are the kind indulged in by beggars , in the sense that all one thinks about is receiving plenty of good things without giving anything in return . In point of fact , the authorities will have to guarantee proper distribution ; how are we then to avoid this cheeky beggar ’ s attitude , which already before the war was that of the public towards the State , becoming infinitely more accentuated ? And if this attitude is adopted towards a foreign country , America for example , the danger becomes very much more serious still . Another dream , and a very widespread one , is to kill ; to kill invoking the highest possible motives , but in an underhand way and without any risk . Whether the State breaks up under the pressure of this diffused terrorism , as is to be feared , or whether it attempts to control it , in either case the repressive and police-ridden aspect of the State , which traditionally is so hated and despised in France , will occupy the forefront . The government which arises in France after the liberation of the country will have to face a triple danger caused by this blood lust , this mendacity complex and this inability to obey . As for a remedy , there is only one : to give French people something to love ; and , in the first place , to give them France to love ; to conceive the reality corresponding to the name of France in such a way that as she actually is , in her very truth , she can be loved with the whole heart . The essence of the contradiction inherent in patriotism is that one ’ s country is something limited whose demands are unlimited . In times of extreme peril , it demands everything . Why should one accord everything to something which is limited ? On the other hand , not to be resolved to give it everything in case of need is to abandon it entirely , for its preservation can not be assured at any lesser price . So one always seems to be either on the debit or the credit side of what is due to it , and if one remains too long on the credit side , one swings later on with all the greater force back on to the debit side , through a process of reaction . The contradiction is only one in appearance . Or , to be more precise , it is a real one , but when thoroughly examined is seen to be one of those basic contradictions belonging to our human condition , which must be recognized , accepted and used as a footboard for hoisting oneself above what is simply human . Never in this world can there be any dimensional equality between an obligation and its subject . The obligation is something infinite , the subject of it is not . This contradiction presses down upon the daily lives of all men , without exception , including those who would be quite incapable of formulating it even confusedly in words . All the devices men have thought they had discovered for avoiding it have turned out to be lies . One of them consists in only being prepared to recognize obligations towards what is not of this world . One variety of this particular device is spurious mysticism , spurious contemplation . Another is the practice of good works carried out in a certain spirit , ‘ for the love of God ’ , as they say , the unfortunate objects of compassion being but the raw material for the action , an anonymous means whereby one ’ s love of God can be manifested . In either case there is a lie , for ‘ he who loveth not his brother whom he hath seen , how should he love God whom he hath not seen ? ’ It is only through things and individual beings on this earth that human love can penetrate to that which lies beyond . Another device consists in admitting that there are on this earth one or more objects enshrining this absolute value , this infinitude , this perfection which are essentially bound up with the obligation as such . That is the lie propagated by idolatry . The third device consists in denying any sort of obligation . You can not prove this by a mathematical demonstration to be an error , for obligation belongs to an order of certainty very superior to that of formal proof . Actually , such a negation is impossible . It amounts to spiritual suicide . And Man is so made that in him spiritual death is accompanied by psychological diseases in themselves fatal . So that , in fact , the instinct of selfpreservation prevents the soul from doing more than draw closer to such a state ; and even so it is seized with a taedium vitae which turns it into a desert . Almost always , or rather , almost certainly always , he who denies all obligations lies to others and to himself ; in actual fact , he recognizes some amongst them . There isn ’ t a man on earth who doesn ’ t at times pronounce an opinion on good and evil , even if it be only to find fault with somebody else . We have to accept the situation provided for us , and which subjects us to absolute obligations in regard to things that are relative , limited and imperfect . So as to be able to discern what these things are and the form in which their demands upon us are likely to be made , we need only to see clearly what their actual relationship is to goodness . So far as our country is concerned , the conceptions of rootedness , of vital medium , suffice in this connexion . They have no need to be established by documentary proof , for of late years they have been verified experimentally . Just as there are certain culture-beds for certain microscopic animals , certain types of soil for certain plants , so there is a certain part of the soul in every one and certain ways of thought and action communicated from one person to another which can only exist in a national setting , and disappear when a country is destroyed . Today every Frenchman knows what it was he missed as soon as France fell . He knows it as well as he knows what is missing when one is forced to go hungry . He knows that one part of his soul sticks so closely to France , that when France is taken away it remains stuck to her , like the skin does to some burning object , and is thus pulled off . There is something , then , to which a part of every Frenchman ’ s soul sticks , and is the same for all , unique , real though impalpable , and real in the sense of something one is able to touch . Hence , what threatens France with destruction—and in certain circumstances an invasion is a threat of destruction—is equivalent to a threat of physical mutilation for all Frenchmen , and for their children and grandchildren , and for their descendants to the end of time . For there are peoples which have never recovered after having once been conquered . That is sufficient for the obligation owed to one ’ s country to impose itself as something self-evident . It co-exists with other obligations . It does not require that we should give everything always ; but that we should give everything sometimes . Just as a miner has sometimes to give everything , when an accident happens in the mine and his companions are in danger of death . It is an accepted , a recognized thing . The obligation owed to one ’ s country is every bit as clear , once the country is actually felt as something real and tangible—as it is being felt today . All Frenchmen have come to feel the reality of France through being deprived of her . People have never ventured to deny the obligation towards one ’ s country otherwise than by denying the reality of the country . Extreme pacifism of the type advocated by Gandhi is not a denial of this obligation , but a particular method for discharging it . This method has never yet been applied , so far as we know ; it has certainly not been applied by Gandhi , who is far too much of a realist . If it had been applied in France , the French would not have used any armed force to resist the invader ; but they would never have been prepared to do anything , of any kind , which might assist the army of occupation ; they would have done everything possible to hinder it , and they would have persisted indefinitely , inflexibly in that attitude . It is clear that , in so doing , far greater numbers would have perished , and in far more frightful circumstances . This would be an imitation of Christ ’ s passion realized on a national scale . If there were any nation , in the aggregate , sufficiently close to perfection for one to be able to suggest to it that it should imitate Christ ’ s passion , such a thing would certainly be well worth doing . As a nation it would disappear ; but this disappearance would be worth infinitely more than the most glorious survival . However , it isn ’ t that way these things are done . Most likely , almost certainly , they can not be done that way . It can only be given to the individual soul , in its most secret manifestations , to follow the path leading to such perfection . At the same time , if there are men whose vocation it is to bear witness to this unattainable perfection , the authorities are in duty bound not to obstruct them , and , in fact , to give them every assistance . In England , conscientious objectors are recognized . But that is not enough . For men like these , we should go to the trouble of inventing something which , without constituting any direct or indirect participation in strategic operations , would involve being present in some way at the actual scene of war , and present in a much more arduous and more perilous fashion than is demanded of the soldiers themselves . That is the unique remedy for the inconveniences arising out of pacifist propaganda . For that would make it possible , without being unjust , to bring discredit on those who , while professing an out-and-out pacifism , or what amounts to the same , refused to stand up for their principles in this way . Pacifism is only capable of causing harm when a confusion arises between two sorts of aversion : the aversion to kill , and the aversion to be killed . The former is honourable , but very weak ; the latter , almost impossible to acknowledge , but very strong . When mixed together , they supply a motive force of extraordinary power , which is not restrained by any feeling of shame , and where the latter sort of aversion is alone operative . French pacifists of recent years had an aversion to being killed , but none to killing ; otherwise they would not have rushed so hastily , in July 1940 , to collaborate with Germany . The very few who were amongst them out of a real aversion to killing were sadly deceived . By separating these two aversions , we eliminate all danger . The influence of the aversion to kill is not dangerous ; in the first place , it is a good influence , for it has its origin in goodness ; secondly , it is weak , and , unfortunately , there is no chance that it should ever be otherwise . As for those whom the fear of death renders weak , they should be treated with compassion , for every human being , unless he has been turned into a fanatic , is , at any rate at times , liable to this weakness ; but if they turn their weakness into a doctrine to be propagated , that is criminal , and it is then necessary , and not difficult , to discredit them . In defining one ’ s native country as a certain particular vital medium , one avoids the contradictions and lies which corrode the idea of patriotism . There is one ’ s own particular vital medium ; but there are others besides . It has been produced by a network of causes in which good and evil , justice and injustice have been mixed up together , and so it can not be the best possible one . It may have arisen at the expense of some other combination richer in vital properties , and if such has been the case , it would be right to regret the fact ; but past events are over and done with ; the particular medium happens to be in existence , and , such as it is , deserves to be guarded like a treasure for the good it contains . The peoples conquered by the soldiers of the king of France in many cases suffered a wrong . But so many organic ties have grown up in the course of centuries that a surgical operation would but add a further wrong to the wrong already done . It is only possible partially to repair the past , and this can only be done through a recognized local and regional life receiving the unreserved encouragement of the authorities within the setting of the French nation . Moreover , the disappearance of the French nation , far from repairing in the slightest bit the wrong resulting from past conquest , would aggravate it in a far more serious manner . Admitting that certain peoples underwent , a few centuries ago , a loss of vitality as a result of French aggression , they would be altogether morally destroyed by a further wound brought about by German aggression . In this sense only is the commonplace true , according to which no incompatibility exists between the love for one ’ s native heath and that for one ’ s native land . For in this way a man from Toulouse can passionately regret the fact that his city should some centuries ago have become French ; that so many marvellous Romanesque churches should have been destroyed to make way for a second-rate imported Gothic ; that the Inquisition should have cut short a spiritual blossoming there ; and can still more passionately vow never to permit that this same city of his should ever become German . The same thing applies to relations with foreign countries . If one ’ s native land is regarded as a vital medium , there is no need for it to be protected from foreign influences , save only in so far as that may be necessary for it to be able to remain such , that is to say , not in any rigorous fashion . The State could cease to be the absolute ruler by divine right over the territories under its control ; and a reasonable and limited authority over these territories exercised by international organizations dealing with essential problems whose scope is an international one would cease to wear the appearance of a crime of lèse-majesté . Nuclei could also be established for the free circulation of ideas , on a vaster scale than France and incorporating France , or connecting certain bits of French territory with certain bits of non-French territory . For instance , wouldn ’ t it be a natural thing for Brittany , Wales , Cornwall and Ireland to feel themselves , in regard to certain things , to be parts of the same environment ? But once again , the more attachment one shows for such nonnational nuclei , the more one will want to preserve the national liberty ; for this sort of intercourse over frontier boundaries doesn ’ t exist for enslaved peoples . That is why the cultural exchanges between Mediterranean countries were incomparably greater and more vital before than after the Roman conquest ; whereas all these countries , when reduced to the unfortunate state of provinces , fell into a dull uniformity . Exchange is only possible where each one preserves his own genius , and that is not possible without liberty . In a general way , if the existence of a great number of lifegiving nuclei is recognized , one ’ s own particular country only constituting one among them , nevertheless , should the latter be threatened with annihilation , all the obligations implied by loyalty towards all these separate nuclei unite in the single obligation to go to the assistance of one ’ s country . For the members of a population which is enslaved to a foreign State are deprived of all these nuclei at once , and not merely of the national nucleus . Thus , when a nation finds itself in peril to this extent , the military obligation becomes the unique way of expressing all one ’ s loyalties in this world . This is true even for conscientious objectors , if sufficient trouble is taken to find for them an equivalent to actual participation in fighting . Once this is recognized , certain modifications in the manner of considering war ought to follow , where peril threatens the nation . In the first place , the distinction between soldiers and civilians , which the pressure of circumstances has already almost obliterated , should be entirely abolished . This was what had , to a large extent , brought about the anti-patriotic reaction after 1918 . Every individual in the population owes his country the whole of his strength , his resources , and his life itself , until the danger has been removed . It is desirable that the sufferings and perils should be shared by all categories of the population , young and old , men and women , the healthy and the sick , to the full extent to which this is technically possible , and even a bit more besides . Lastly , personal honour is so intimately bound up with the performance of this obligation , and external means of compulsion are so contrary to principles of honour , that all those who desire to escape it should be allowed to do so ; they would be made to lose their nationality , and , in addition , either banished and forbidden ever to set foot in the country again , or be made to suffer some permanent form of indignity as a public mark that they had forfeited their right to personal honour . It is shocking that want of personal honour should be punished in the same way as robbery or assassination . Those who don ’ t want to defend their country should be made to lose , not life or liberty , but purely and simply their country . If the state of the country is such that for a great many the latter is but a trifling punishment , then the military code also proves itself to be without efficacy . We can not be ignorant of the fact . If at certain times the military obligation comprehends all earthly loyalties , the State is under the reciprocal duty , at all times , to protect every nucleus , whether in or outside national territory , from which a part of the population , large or small , draws some of its spiritual life . The State ’ s most obvious duty is to keep efficient watch at all times over the security of the national territory . Security doesn ’ t mean absence of danger , for in this world danger is ever-present ; it means a reasonable chance of being able to weather any storms which should arise . But that is only the State ’ s most elementary duty . If it does no more than that , it is as though it did nothing at all ; for if that is all it does , it can not even succeed in doing that . The State ’ s duty is to make the country , in the highest possible degree , a reality . The country was not a reality for very many Frenchmen in 1939 . It has again become one as a result of deprivation . It must be made to remain so in possession , and for that to happen it must really become , in fact , a life-giving agent , really be turned into good , root-fixing ground . It must also be made a favourable setting for participation in and loyal attachment to all other sorts of environmental expression . Today , whilst Frenchmen have recovered the feeling that France is a reality , they have at the same time become far more conscious than before of local differences . The dividing up of France into separate portions , the censorship of correspondence which limits exchanges of thought to a restricted area , have each played their part , and paradoxically enough , the forcible throwing together of the population has also greatly contributed to this . People have now in a much sharper , more permanent form than before the feeling that they belong to Brittany , Lorraine , Provence or Paris . There is an element of hostility in this feeling which we should try to get rid of ; just as it is urgent also to get rid of xenophobia . But this feeling in itself ought not to be discouraged ; on the contrary . It would be disastrous to declare it anti-patriotic . In the atmosphere of anguish , confusion , solitude , uprootedness in which the French find themselves , all loyalties , all attachments are worth preserving like treasures of infinite value and rarity , worth tending like the most delicate plants . That the Vichy Government should have put forward a regionalist doctrine is neither here nor there . Its only mistake in this connexion has been in not applying it . Far from always preaching the exact opposite of its various battle-cries , we ought to adopt many of the ideas launched by the propaganda services of the National Revolution , but turn them into realities . In the same way , the French , because of their isolation , have come to realize that France is a small country , that shut up inside her it is stifling and they require a wider range . The idea of Europe , of European unity , contributed a good deal towards the success of collaborationist propaganda in the early days . We can not do too much to encourage , nourish such sentiments as these . It would be disastrous to create any opposition between them and patriotic sentiments . Lastly , we can not do too much to encourage the existence of progressive associations not forming wheels within the wheels of public administration ; for that is the only condition on which they won ’ t just become corpses . The trade-unions are a case in point , when they are not burdened with day-to-day responsibilities in the matter of economic organization . The same can be said of Christian associations , Protestant or Catholic , and particularly of organizations like the J.O.C.33 ; but should the State allow itself to be influenced the least little bit by clerical wishes , it would assuredly kill them on the spot . The same can also be said of associations which arose after the defeat in 1940 , some of them officially , like the chantiers de jeunesse and camps de compagnons,34 others clandestinely , like the resistance groups . The former possess a certain amount of life , in spite of their official character , thanks to an exceptional conjunction of circumstances ; but if their official rôle were to be maintained , they would just lose every spark of vitality . The latter have arisen in opposition to the State , and if one were to yield to the temptation to grant them an official existence in the public life of the country , such a thing would ravage them morally to a terrible degree . On the other hand , if associations of this sort are out of contact with public affairs , they cease to exist . It is necessary , therefore , that while not forming part of the public administration , they should yet at the same time not lose all contact with it . A method of effecting this might be , for example , for representatives of such associations to be frequently chosen by the State to carry out special missions on a temporary basis . But the State would , on the one hand , have to select these representatives itself , and , on the other hand , all their associates would have to regard their having been selected as a matter for pride . Such a method could gradually develop into an institution . Here again , whilst every effort is made to eliminate violent antagonisms , differences should be encouraged . In a country like ours , the perpetual stirring of ideas can never do any harm . It is mental inertia which is fatal to it . The duty which falls to the State to ensure that the people are provided with a country to which they really feel they belong can never be regarded as a condition precedent to the carrying out of the military obligation by the population in times of national peril . For if the State fails in its duty , if the country is allowed to fall into ruin , nevertheless , whilst national independence subsists , there is always hope of a resurrection ; if we look closely , we find in the history of all countries the most surprising ups and downs , sometimes following quite swiftly upon one another . But if the country is subdued by foreign arms , there is nothing left to hope for , save the possibility of a rapid liberation . Hope alone , it is worth dying to preserve , when nothing else is left . Thus , although one ’ s country is a fact , and , as such , subject to external conditions , to hazards of every kind , in times of mortal danger there is none the less an unconditional obligation to go to its assistance . But it is obvious that , in fact , the people will show all the greater ardour in its defence the more they will have been made to feel its reality . The patriotic conception as defined above is incompatible with present-day views about the country ’ s history , its national grandeur , and above all with the way in which one talks at present about the Empire . France possesses an empire , and consequently , whatever attitude one may adopt with regard to it , it poses certain factual problems which are highly complex and vary considerably according to the different localities . But we mustn ’ t mix everything up together . First of all , there is a question of principle , and even something less definite than that , a question of sentiment . On the whole , has a Frenchman the right to be proud that France possesses an empire , and to think and talk about it with pride and joy , and in the tones of a legitimate owner ? Certainly , if he happens to be a French patriot after the style of Richelieu , Louis XIV or Maurras . But not if the Christian ethic and the spirit of 1789 are indissolubly mixed into the actual substance of his patriotism . Every other nation might possibly have had the right to carve out an empire for itself , but not France ; for the same reason which made the temporal sovereignty of the Pope a scandal in the eyes of Christendom . When one takes upon oneself , as France did in 1789 , the function of thinking on behalf of the world , of defining justice for the world , one may not become an owner of human flesh and blood . Even if it be true that if we hadn ’ t done so , others would have got hold of these unfortunate native peoples and would have treated them still worse , that was not a legitimate motive ; when all is said and done , the total amount of harm would have been less . Motives of this kind are more often than not bad ones . It is not for a priest to become the owner of a brothel on the supposition that its inmates would be worse treated by some bully . It was not for France to surrender her self-respect out of compassion . Besides , that is not what she did . Nobody would seriously venture to claim that she went out to conquer these peoples to prevent other countries ill-treating them : all the less so since it was she who , in the nineteenth century , was largely responsible for bringing these colonial adventures back into fashion . Amongst those she has reduced to submission , there are some who feel very keenly how scandalous it is that she of all countries should have done this ; their resentment towards us is aggravated by a terribly grievous kind of bitterness and by a sort of bewilderment . It may be that France now has to choose between her attachment to her Empire and the need to have a soul of her own again ; or , in more general terms , between having a soul of her own and the Roman or Corneille-esque conception of greatness . If she chooses wrongly , if we ourselves force her to choose wrongly , which is only too likely , she will have neither the one nor the other , but only the most appalling adversity , which she will undergo with astonishment , without anybody being able to discover any reason for it . And all those who are now in a position to get up and speak , or to wield a pen , will be eternally responsible for having committed a crime . Bernanos has understood and declared that Hitlerism is a return to pagan Rome . But has he forgotten , have we forgotten , what an influential part Rome has played in our history , our culture , and still plays today in our everyday thoughts ? If , out of horror for a certain form of evil , we have taken the terrible decision to make war , with all the atrocities war necessarily involves , can we be forgiven if we make less pitiless war against that same form of evil in our own hearts ? If all the grandeur after the style of Corneille attracts us by its heroic glamour , Germany can equally well attract us too , for the German soldiers are undoubtedly ‘ heroes ’ . In the present confusion of thought and feeling over the subject of patriotism , is there any guarantee at all that a French soldier in Africa is inspired by a purer ideal of sacrifice than a German soldier in Russia ? Actually , there isn ’ t any . If we do not feel what a terrible responsibility this places on us , we can not remain innocent in the midst of this unleashing of crime throughout the world . If there is one thing for which it is necessary to face everything , set everything at naught for love of the truth , it is that one . We are all brought together in the name of patriotism . What is the use of us , what scorn shall we not deserve , if in our thoughts on this subject the least vestige of a lie is found ? But if feelings of a Corneille-esque type don ’ t inspire our patriotism , one may well ask what motive there is to replace them . Yet , there is one , no less vital , absolutely pure , and corresponding exactly to present circumstances . It is compassion for our country . We have a glorious respondent . It was Joan of Arc who used to say she felt pity for the kingdom of France . But we can quote an infinitely higher authority . In the Gospels , there is not the least indication that Christ experienced anything resembling love for Jerusalem and Judaea , save only the love which goes wrapped in compassion . He never showed any other kind of attachment to his country . But his compassion he expressed on more than one occasion . He wept over the city , foreseeing , as it was not difficult to do at that time , the destruction which should shortly fall upon it . He spoke to it as to a person . ‘ Oh , Jerusalem , Jerusalem … how often would I have gathered … ’ Even as He was carrying the cross , He showed once again the pity He felt for it . Let no one imagine that compassion for one ’ s country excludes warlike energy . It fired the Carthaginians to perform one of the most prodigious deeds of heroism in the whole of history . After being conquered and reduced to very little by Scipio Africanus , they subsequently underwent over the course of fifty years a process of demoralization compared with which the French capitulation at Munich is as nothing at all . They were mercilessly exposed to whatever injuries the Numidians cared to inflict on them , and , having renounced by treaty the right to go to war , they vainly implored Rome for permission to defend themselves . When they finally did so without permission , their army was utterly wiped out . They then had to implore the pardon of the Romans . They agreed to hand over three hundred children of the nobility and all the arms they possessed . Then their delegates were ordered to evacuate the city entirely and definitively , so that it could be razed to the ground . They burst into cries of indignation , then into the bitterest tears . ‘ They called upon their native city by name , and , addressing it as though it were a person , uttered the most heartrending things. ’ Then they begged the Romans , if they were determined to do them injury , only to spare their city , its stones , its temples , to which no possible guilt could be attached , and instead , if necessary , exterminate the entire population ; they declared that such a course would bring less shame upon the Romans and would be infinitely preferable for the people of Carthage . The Romans remained inflexible ; whereupon the city rose in rebellion , although devoid of resources , and it took Scipio Africanus , at the head of a large army , three whole years to reduce it and lay it waste . This poignantly tender feeling for some beautiful , precious , fragile and perishable object has a warmth about it which the sentiment of national grandeur altogether lacks . The vital current which inspires it is a perfectly pure one , and is charged with an extraordinary intensity . Isn ’ t a man easily capable of acts of heroism to protect his children , or his aged parents ? And yet no vestige of grandeur is attached to these . A perfectly pure love for one ’ s country bears a close resemblance to the feelings which his young children , his aged parents , or a beloved wife inspire in a man . The thought of weakness can inflame love in just the same way as can the thought of strength , but in the former case the flame is of an altogether different order of purity . The compassion felt for fragility is always associated with love for real beauty , because we are keenly conscious of the fact that the existence of the really beautiful things ought to be assured for ever , and is not . One can either love France for the glory which would seem to ensure for her a prolonged existence in time and space ; or else one can love her as something which , being earthly , can be destroyed , and is all the more precious on that account . These are two distinct ways of loving ; perhaps , most probably , incompatible with each other , although in speech they become mixed up together . Those whose hearts are made so as to experience the latter way can yet find themselves sometimes , through force of habit , using forms of speech which are really only suitable in the case of the former . But the latter is alone legitimate for a Christian , for it alone wears the Christian badge of humility . It alone belongs to that species of love which can be given the name of charity . Nor should it be supposed that the object of such love need necessarily be confined to an unhappy country . Happiness is as much an object for compassion as unhappiness , because it belongs to this earth , in other words is incomplete , frail and fleeting . Moreover , there is , unfortunately , always a certain amount of unhappiness in the life of any country . Let no one imagine either that a love of this nature would run the risk of ignoring or rejecting what there is of pure and genuine grandeur in the past history of France , or in the country ’ s present hopes and ideals . Quite the opposite . Compassion is all the more tender , all the more poignant , the more good one is able to discern in the being who forms the object of it , and it predisposes one to discern the good . When a Christian represents to himself Christ on the Cross , his compassion is not diminished by the thought of the latter ’ s perfection , nor the other way about . But , on the other hand , such a love can keep its eyes open on injustices , cruelties , mistakes , falsehoods , crimes and scandals contained in the country ’ s past , its present and in its ambitions in general , quite openly and fearlessly , and without being thereby diminished ; the love being only rendered thereby more painful . Where compassion is concerned , crime itself provides a reason , not for withdrawing oneself , but for approaching , not with the object of sharing the guilt , but the shame . Mankind ’ s crimes didn ’ t diminish Christ ’ s compassion . Thus compassion keeps both eyes open on both the good and the bad and finds in each sufficient reasons for loving . It is the only love on this earth which is true and righteous . Just now it is the only sort of love that is suitable for the French . If the events we have recently been living through are not sufficient warning to us of the need to change our way of loving our country , what sort of lesson is there which could teach us ? What more can one receive to awaken one ’ s interest than a heavy blow with a club on the head ? Compassion for our country is the only sentiment which doesn ’ t strike a false note at the present time , suits the situation in which the souls and bodies of Frenchmen actually find themselves , and possesses at once the humility and dignity appropriate to misfortune , and also that simplicity which misfortune requires above everything else . To call up before people ’ s minds at this time France ’ s historic greatness , her past and future glories , the splendour which has surrounded her existence , none of that is possible without a sort of inward contraction which gives something forced to one ’ s tone . Nothing that in any way resembles pride can be suitable for those in misfortune . For the French who are suffering , recollections of this sort fall into the category of compensations . To seek compensations in misfortune is a bad thing . If the past is recalled too often , if it is turned into the unique source of comfort , such proceedings can cause immeasurable harm . The French are being starved of greatness . But for the unfortunate , greatness after the Roman manner is not what is wanted ; for either it seems to them a mockery , or else their minds become poisoned by it , as was the case in Germany . Compassion for France is not a compensation for , but a spiritualization of , the sufferings being undergone ; it is able to transfigure even the most purely physical sufferings , such as cold and hunger . Whoever feels cold and hunger , and is tempted to pity himself , can , instead of doing that , from out of his own shrunken frame , direct his pity towards France ; the very cold and hunger themselves then cause the love of France to enter into the body and penetrate to the depths of the soul . And this same compassion is able , without hindrance , to cross frontiers , extend itself over all countries in misfortune , over all countries without exception ; for all peoples are subjected to the wretchedness of our human condition . Whereas pride in national glory is by its nature exclusive , non-transferable , compassion is by its nature universal ; it is only more potential where distant and unfamiliar things are concerned , more real , more physical , more charged with blood , tears and effective energy where things close at hand are concerned . National pride is far removed from the affairs of daily life . In France , its only means of expression is through the resistance ; but there are many who either have not the opportunity to take any effective part in the resistance , or can only devote some of their time to it . Compassion for France is an incentive charged with at least as much active value for the purposes of the resistance ; but one which can besides find daily , uninterrupted expression , on every possible sort of occasion , in a fraternal note marking the relations between Frenchmen . Fraternal feelings flourish readily in the midst of compassion for misfortune , which , while inflicting on each his share of suffering , endangers something far more precious than the well-being of each . National pride , whether it be in good times or in bad , is incapable of creating any real , ardent sense of fraternity . This didn ’ t exist among the Romans . They didn ’ t know what really tender feelings were . A patriotism inspired by compassion gives the poorest part of the population a privileged moral position . National glory only acts as a stimulant among the lower orders of society at times when every one can , while looking forward to his country ’ s glory , look forward at the same time to having as large a personal share therein as he can wish for . Such was the case at the beginning of Napoleon ’ s reign . Any little French lad , no matter where he hailed from , could legitimately carry in his heart any sort of dreams as to the future ; no ambition could be regarded as great enough to be absurd . Every one knew that all ambitions would not be realized , but each one in particular had a chance of being , and many of them could be partially so . A noteworthy document of the period states that Napoleon ’ s popularity was due , less to the devotion Frenchmen felt for his person , than to the possibilities of advancement , the opportunities of carving out a career for themselves which he offered them . That is exactly the feeling which appears in Le Rouge et le Noir . The Romantics were children who felt bored because they no longer had before them the prospect of unrestricted social advancement . They sought literary glory as a substitute . But this particular stimulant is only found in times of upheaval . Nor can one say that it ever takes the form of an invitation to the people as such . Every man of the people who partakes of it , dreams of emerging from amongst the people , leaving behind him the anonymity which characterizes humanity in the mass . This ambition , when it is widely held , is the result of a disturbed social condition , and the cause of more serious disturbances to follow ; for it sees in social stability an obstacle . Although it happens to be a stimulant , it can not be said that it is a healthy one , either for the individual soul or for the country . It is quite likely that this stimulant plays a large part in the present resistance movement ; for as far as France ’ s future is concerned , hopes are readily entertained ; and as for the individual ’ s own future , any one , no matter who it is , who has proved his mettle in the midst of danger , can look forward to no matter what in the state of latent revolution in which the country finds itself . But if this is so , it presents a terrible danger for the period of reconstruction , and another stimulant needs to be discovered immediately . In times of social stability , in which , save in exceptional cases , those who form part of the anonymous mass remain in it more or less , never even seeking to emerge therefrom , the people can not feel themselves at home in a patriotism founded upon pride and pomp-and-glory . It is as strange and unfamiliar to them as are the salons of Versailles , which constitute one of its expressions . Glory is the reverse of anonymity . If to military glory we add literary , scientific and other sorts of glory , the people will continue to feel themselves strangers . The knowledge that certain Frenchmen who have covered themselves with glory have come out of their ranks will not , in stable periods , afford the people any comfort ; for if the former have come out of the people , they have ceased to form part of the people . On the other hand , if their country is presented to them as something beautiful and precious , but which is , in the first place , imperfect , and secondly , very frail and liable to suffer misfortune , and which it is necessary to cherish and preserve , they will rightly feel themselves to be more closely identified with it than will other classes of society . For the people have a monopoly of a certain sort of knowledge , perhaps the most important of all , that of the reality of misfortune ; and for that very reason , they feel all the more keenly the preciousness of those things which deserve to be protected from it , and how incumbent it is on each of us to cherish and protect them . Melodrama reflects this popular state of feeling . Why it happens to be such a dreadful literary form would be worth while taking the trouble to examine . But far from being a false form of expression , it is very close , in a certain sense , to reality . Were such a relationship to be established between the people and the country , the former would no longer regard their own personal sufferings as crimes committed by the country against themselves , but as ills suffered by the country in and through themselves . The difference is immense . In another sense , it is slight , and very little would be required to effect the change . But that little would have to come from another world . This presupposes a dissociation between the country and the State . Which is possible if grandeur in the Corneille style is abolished . But it would involve anarchy if , to compensate for this , the State were unable to manage to inspire of its own accord an increased public esteem . To do that , it ought certainly not to return to the old methods of parliamentary life and party struggle . But what is most important of all , perhaps , is a complete overhaul of the police system . Circumstances would lend themselves to this . The English police system might be studied with advantage . At all events , the liberation of the country will , it is to be hoped , bring with it the liquidation of the personnel composing the police force , except for those who have taken a personal part against the enemy . They must be replaced by men who enjoy public esteem , and since that is , unfortunately , chiefly founded nowadays on money and diplomas , a fairly high standard of education must be demanded even beginning with ordinary policemen and inspectors , and further up really high qualifications , with correspondingly high pay . It would even be necessary , if the vogue for having Grande Ecoles35 continues in France—which is perhaps not to be desired—to have one for the police , candidates being selected by examination . These are certainly clumsy methods ; but something of the kind is indispensable . Furthermore—and this is still more important—we must do away entirely with social categories like those of prostitutes and ex-convicts , which play officially the part of a defenceless herd delivered over to the whims of the police , and providing the latter at the same time with both victims and accomplices ; for a mutual contamination is under such conditions inevitable , collaboration having a debasing effect on both sides . We must abolish , in law , both these two categories of persons . Criminal dishonesty in matters connected with the State on the part of men in public life must also be effectively punished , and more severely so than armed robbery . The State in its administrative function should appear as the manager of the country ’ s resources ; a more or less capable manager , who is expected to be on the whole rather less capable than otherwise , because his task is a difficult one and carried out under morally unfavourable conditions . Obedience is none the less obligatory , not because of any particular right to issue commands possessed by the State , but because obedience is essential for the country ’ s preservation and tranquillity . We must obey the State , however it happens to be , rather like loving children left by their parents , gone abroad , in the charge of some mediocre governess , but who obey her nevertheless out of love for their parents . If the State happens not to be mediocre , so much the better ; besides , the pressure of public opinion must always be exercised in the manner of a stimulant encouraging it to leave the path of mediocrity ; but whether mediocre or not , the obligation of obedience remains the same . It is certainly not an unlimited obligation , but its only valid limit is a revolt on the part of conscience . No criterion can be offered indicating exactly what this limit is ; it is even impossible for each of us to prescribe one for himself once and for all : when you feel you can ’ t obey any longer , you just have to disobey . But there is at least one necessary condition , although insufficient of itself , making it possible to disobey without being guilty of crime ; this is to be urged forward by so imperious an obligation that one is constrained to scorn all risks of whatever kind . If one feels inclined to disobey , but one is dissuaded by the excessive danger involved , that is altogether unpardonable , whether it be because one contemplated an act of disobedience , or else because one failed to carry it out , as the case may be . Besides , whenever one isn ’ t strictly obliged to disobey , one is under the strict obligation to obey . A country can not possess liberty unless it is recognized that disobedience towards the authorities , every time it doesn ’ t proceed from an overriding sense of duty , is more dishonourable than theft . That means to say that public order ought to be regarded as more sacred than private property . The authorities could popularize this way of looking at things by means of education and other suitable methods which would have to be thought out . But it is only compassion for our country , the watchful and tender concern to keep it out of harm ’ s way , which can give to peace , and especially to civil peace , what civil or foreign war possesses , unfortunately , of itself—something stirring , touching , poetic and sacred . This compassion alone can give us back that feeling we have lacked for so long , and so rarely experienced throughout the course of history , and which Théophile36 expressed in the beautiful line : ‘ La sainte majesté des lois ’ . When Théophile wrote that line , it was perhaps the last time such a feeling was deeply experienced in France . Afterwards came Richelieu , then the Fronde , then Louis XIV , and so on . Montesquieu vainly sought to re-establish it in the public imagination by means of a book . The men of 1789 laid claim to it , but they didn ’ t really feel it in their hearts , otherwise the country wouldn ’ t have slithered so easily into war , both domestic and foreign . Since then , even our language has become unsuitable to express it . It is , nevertheless , this sentiment which people are trying to revive , or its pale counterpart , when they talk about ‘ légitimité ’ .37 But giving a sentiment a name is not sufficient to call it to life . That is a fundamental truth which we are too apt to forget . Why lie to ourselves ? In 1939 , just before the war , under the régime of decree-laws , republican légitimité already no longer existed . It had departed like Villon ’ s youth ‘ qui son partement ni ’ a celé ’ , noiselessly , without any warning , and without any one having done or said anything to stop it . As for the feeling for légitimité , it was completely dead . That it should now reappear in the thoughts of those in exile , that it should occupy a certain place , in company with other feelings in fact incompatible with it , in dreams for curing a sick people , all that means nothing at all , or very little . If it was dead in 1939 , how should it suddenly become effective again after years of systematic disobedience ? On the other hand , the Constitution of 1875 can no longer serve as a basis for légitimité , after having come crashing down in 1940 amid general public indifference and even contempt , after being abandoned to its fate by the French People . For that is exactly what they did do . Neither the resistance groups nor the French in London can do anything about it . If a shadow of regret was expressed , it was not by any section of the people , but by parliamentary men in whom their profession kept alive an interest in republican institutions , elsewhere non-existent . Once again , it makes no difference that some considerable time afterwards the feeling for légitimité should have reappeared to a certain extent . At the present moment , hunger invests the Third Republic with all the poetry associated with a time when there was enough to eat . It is a fugitive kind of poetry . Moreover , the disgust felt for so many years and which attained its maximum in 1940 still persists . It is nevertheless certain that as and when the Vichy business falls to pieces , and to the extent to which revolutionary , possibly Communist , institutions don ’ t arise , a return will be made to the political structure of the Third Republic . But that will only be because there is a void which has to be filled with something . That is a question of necessity , not of légitimité , and corresponds to the people ’ s attitude , which is not one of loyal enthusiasm , but of dull resignation . On the other hand , the date 1789 certainly awakens a really deep echo ; but all there is attached to it is an inspiration , there are no institutions . Seeing that we have , in fact , recently experienced a break in historical continuity , constitutional legality can no longer be regarded as having an historical basis ; it must be made to derive from the eternal source of all legality . The men who offer their services to the country to govern it will have to publicly recognize certain obligations corresponding to essential aspirations of the people eternally inscribed in the depths of popular feeling ; the people must have confidence in the word and in the capacity of these men , and be provided with means of expressing the fact ; they must also be made to feel that , in accepting these men , they give an undertaking to obey them . Since the people ’ s obedience towards the public authorities is a necessity for the country , this obedience becomes a sacred obligation , and one which confers on the public authorities themselves , seeing that they form the object of it , the same sacred character . This doesn ’ t mean an idolizing of the State in association with patriotism in the Roman style . It is the exact opposite of this . The State is sacred , not in the way an idol is sacred , but in the way common objects serving a religious purpose , like the altar , the baptismal water or anything else of the kind , are sacred . Everybody knows they are only material objects ; but material objects which are regarded as sacred because they serve a sacred purpose . That is the sort of majesty appropriate for the State . If we are unable to inspire the people of France with a conception of this nature , they will have only the choice between anarchy and idolatry . Idolatry might take a communist form . That is probably what would happen . It might also take a nationalist form , in which case it would presumably have as its object the pair of idols so characteristic of our age , composed of a man acclaimed as leader and at his side the iron-bound machine of State . But we mustn ’ t forget that , first , publicity is able to manufacture leaders , and secondly , if circumstances place a man of genuine ability in such a situation , he rapidly becomes a prisoner of his rôle . In other words , in the language of today , the absence of a pure source of inspiration would leave the French people no other alternatives than anarchy , Communism or Fascism . There are some people , in America for example , who ask themselves whether the French in London might not have leanings towards Fascism . That is not putting the question in the proper way . Intentions , by themselves , are not of any great importance , save when their aim is directly evil , for to do evil the necessary means are always within easy reach . But good intentions only count when accompanied by the corresponding means for putting them into effect . St. Peter hadn ’ t the slightest intention of denying Christ ; but he did so because the grace was not in him which , had it been there , would have enabled him not to do . And even the energy , the categorical tone he employed to underline the contrary intention , helped to deprive him of this grace . It is a case which is worth pondering in all the trials life sets before us . The thing is to know whether the French in London possess the necessary means to prevent the people of France from sliding into Fascism , and at the same time stop them from falling into either Communism or anarchy . Fascism , Communism and anarchy being all scarcely different , almost equivalent , expressions of the self-same evil , what we want to know is whether they have any remedy for this evil . If they haven ’ t one , their raison d ’ être , which is to keep France in the war , is brought entirely to an end by victory , which will then plunge them back again among the mass of their fellow-countrymen . If they have one , they should already have begun applying it to a great extent , and efficiently so , long before victory . For a treatment of this description can not be started in the midst of all the nervous tension which will , both in each individual and in the mass , necessarily accompany the liberation of the country . Still less can it be started once people ’ s nerves have quietened down again—supposing one day such a thing to happen ; it would be much too late : any sort of treatment would then be entirely out of the question . The important thing , then , is not for them to assert before the world their right to govern France ; any more than it is for a doctor to publicly assert his right to prescribe treatment for a patient . The essential thing is to have rightly diagnosed the case , conceived a cure , chosen the right medicaments , and made sure the patient is supplied with them . When a doctor knows how to do all that , not without a certain risk of making mistakes , but with a reasonable chance of being right , then , if other people try to prevent him exercising his function , and to put a charlatan in his place , it is his duty to oppose them with all his might . But if , in some place where there isn ’ t a doctor , a lot of ignoramuses busy themselves about the bedside of a sick man whose condition calls for the most precise , most up-to-date form of treatment , what does it matter in whose particular hands among that lot he happens to be when it comes to dying , or else being saved by a stroke of luck ? No doubt , it must in any case always be better that he should find himself in the hands of those who love him . But those who love him won ’ t inflict on him the additional suffering of a battle royal raging at his pillow , unless they know themselves to be in possession of a likely means of saving his life . 1 Ecole Normale Supérieure : situated rue d ’ Ulm in Paris . Institution created by the Convention in 1794 , reorganized under the Empire in 1808 . Its object is to form an élite of teachers for secondary schools , and , in practice , teachers for all the higher branches of education are drawn from it . [ Translator . ] 2 Tour de France : one of the last vestiges of the guild or corporation system . Young workmen serving their apprenticeship were known as compagnons , and in order to perfect themselves in their trade , used to undertake a journey on foot across France , following a fixed itinerary which took in the principal centres of production . The arrival of the railway gradually caused this very ancient custom to die out . [ Translator . ] 3 J.O.C . : stands for Jeunesse Ouvrière Chrétienne . Organization founded by the French Catholic clergy , chiefly concerned with exercising an influence on working-class youth from the professional and social points of view . In the latter respect , it bears a certain affinity to the Boy Scout Movement . [ Translator . ] 4 C.G.T. , or Confédération Générale du Travail : founded towards the end of the last century , a few years after the law of 1884 authorizing the existence of tradeunions . This organization has dominated the industrial workers ’ trade-union movement in France . At the height of the general strike of 1947 , a split occurred between extremist and non-extremist elements , the latter regrouping themselves under the banner of Force Ouvrière . The C.G.T . still remains , however , the largest single industrial workers ’ trade-union organization ; the second largest being the C.F.T.C . ( Confédération Française des Travailleurs Chrétiens ) , with the aforesaid Force Ouvrière coming third . [ Translator . ] 5 chantier de jeunesse : type of instructional centre created by the Vichy Government with the object of giving young people on leaving school a supplementary education and practical experience in a trade . [ Translator . ] 6 Budé Library : the Guillaume Budé Library was started some years ago by the association of the same name , with the object of providing the better-class reading public with the best possible texts in the Greek , Latin and French classics , translated or revised , as the case may be , and annotated by experts . [ Translator . ] 7 camps de compagnons : see note on p. 65 . These camps were apparently organized on a parallel basis to the chantiers , and were designed to replace the period of military service prohibited by the German occupants . [ Translator . ] 8 C.G.T . : see note p. 64 . [ Translator . ] 9 Tour de France : see note p. 52 . [ Translator . ] 10 Chantiers or Compagnons : see notes pp . 65 and 71 . [ Translator . ] 11 ‘ out of it ’ : as in text . [ Translator . ] 12 Confidences and Marie-Claire : two illustrated weeklies addressed to the feminine public , whose apparently elevated tone fails to disguise their profound moral and intellectual mediocrity . [ Translator . ] 13 ‘ in it ’ : as in text . [ Translator . ] 14 the financier on the shoemaker : reference to La Fontaines ’ s fable ‘ Le Savetier et le Financier ’ , vol . 8 , fable no . 2 . [ Translator . ] 15 Tour de France : see note p. 52 . [ Translator . ] 16 Marie-Claire : see note p. 79 . [ Translator . ] 17 … ‘ disgrace to France ’ : prostitution ceased to be officially recognized in France in 1947 . [ Translator . ] 18 Belleville : working-class quarter in the N.E . of Paris . [ Translator . ] 19 Jocistes : members of the J.O.C . ( Jeunesse Ouvrière Chrétienne ) . See note p. 63 . [ Translator . ] 20 Saint-Sulpice : reference to former seminary situated close to church of that name in Paris , and historically one of the most renowned centres of ecclesiastical education in France , where Ernest Renan studied to become a priest . Here the implication is an excessively orthodox religious outlook , lacking in spiritual spontaneity . [ Translator . ] 21 M. Chevalier : M. Jacques Chevalier was occupying the post of Professor of Philosophy at Grenoble University , when he was sent for by Marshal Pétain to become Minister of National Education , during the Occupation . [ Translator . ] 22 ‘ Work , Family , Country ’ : ‘ Travail , Famille , Patrie ’ was the motto adopted by the Pétain Government on taking over power . [ Translator . ] 23 ‘ the forty kings who in a thousand years made France ’ : this motto headed the front page of the royalist organ Action Française , edited by Charles Maurras and Léon Daudet , before the war . [ Translator . ] 24 pions : a slang term for supervisors or under-masters in secondary schools . Used in a more general sense , it implies a coarse , narrow-minded , aggressive type of person . [ Translator . ] 25 Orlando ’ s mare : reference to Ariosto ’ s Orlando Furioso . The mare in question possessed every quality except that she happened to be dead . [ Translator . ] 26 Guignol : figure of popular French comedy . Dates from towards the end of the eighteenth century . Originated in Lyons , like Punch in London . Occupied in directing pointed sallies , though tinged with benevolence , at humanity in general , and in verbally castigating the powers that be . [ Translator . ] 27 Epithet ‘ policier ’ : translator ’ s note in answer to implied query by author of book : Not in English , at any rate . 28 ‘ Right or wrong , my country ’ : as in text . [ Translator . ] 29 even today … : written in 1943 . [ Translator . ] 30 the people of ‘ Action Française ’ : militant royalists , convinced that the salvation of France depended on the overthrow of the Republic and its replacement by a monarchy ; if necessary by violence . See also note p. 105 . [ Translator . ] 31 ‘ … which he suffered ’ : reference : Philippians ii , 6 and 8 , and Hebrews v , 8 . [ Translator . ] 32 The present collaborators . … written in 1943 . [ Translator . ] 33 J.O.C . : see note p. 63 . [ Translator . ] 34 Chantiers de jeunesse and camps de compagnous : see notes pp . 65 and 71 . [ Translator . ] 35 Grandes Ecoles : the so-called ‘ Grandes Ecoles ’ are all the State-directed centres of higher education for training the élite of the majority of the leading professions—for example , the Ecole Polytechnique , Ecole Militaire de St. Cyr , Ecole Normale Supérieure , etc . [ Translator . ] 36 Théophile : i.e . Théophile de Viau , early seventeenth-century poet . [ Translator . ] 37 ‘ légitimité ’ : legitimacy , that is , in accordance with law . [ Translator . ] Part III The Growing of Roots THE GROWING OF ROOTS The problem of a method for breathing an inspiration into a people is quite a new one . Plato alludes to it in his Politics and elsewhere ; doubtless there were precepts on this subject among the secret stores of knowledge accumulated in pre-Roman antiquity , of which no trace has been left . Possibly this problem and others akin to it continued to be discussed in such circles as those of the Templars and early free masons . Montesquieu , unless I am mistaken , was unaware of it . Rousseau , with his powerful mind , clearly recognized its existence , but didn ’ t go any further . The men of 1789 do not appear to have had any inkling of it . In 1793 , without people having gone to the trouble of raising the problem , still less of investigating it , hasty solutions were improvised , such as festivals in honour of the Supreme Being , of the Goddess of Reason , which were just ridiculous and odious . In the nineteenth century , the level of general intelligence had descended very far below the point at which such questions are raised . In our own day , people have investigated and penetrated deeply into the problem of propaganda . Hitler , in particular , has made lasting contributions on this subject to the store of human knowledge . But it is an altogether different problem . Propaganda is not directed towards creating an inspiration : it closes , seals up all the openings through which an inspiration might pass ; it fills the whole spirit with fanaticism . Its measures can not be suitable for obtaining a contrary objective . Nor is it just a question of adopting reverse measures : the causal connexion is not so simple . It must not be thought either that the inspiring of a people is a mystery reserved to God alone , and for which , consequently , no method exists . The supreme and perfect state of mystical contemplation is something that is infinitely more mysterious still , and yet St. John of the Cross wrote treatises on the method of attaining to such a state , which , by their scientific precision , are far and away superior to anything produced by the psychologists or professors of our own time . If he felt called upon to do this , he was doubtless right , for he was certainly competent ; the beauty of his writings is a sufficiently clear indication of their authenticity . Actually , from remote antiquity , long before Christianity , right up to the latter half of the Renaissance , it was always universally recognized that there is a method to be followed in spiritual matters and in everything connected with the soul ’ s welfare . The ever greater and greater methodical control which men have exercised over matter since the sixteenth century has led them to believe , by way of contrast , that the things of the soul are either arbitrary or else bound up with some form of magic , with the immediate efficacy of intentions and words . Such is not the case . Everything in creation is dependent on method , including the points of intersection between this world and the next . That is what the word Logos indicates , signifying connexion even more than word . The method merely differs according to the different sphere . The higher one goes , the more rigorous and precise it becomes . It would be strange , indeed , if the order of material things were to reflect more of divine wisdom than that of spiritual things . The contrary is true . It is unfortunate for us that this problem , in regard to which , unless I am wrong , we have nothing we can look to for guidance , should be precisely the one that requires today the most urgent solution on our part , under pain not so much of disappearing altogether as of never having really existed . Besides , if Plato , for example , had devised a general solution for it , we should require to do more than make a study of his solution in order to get ourselves out of the quandary ; for we have to face a situation in regard to which history is of little help to us . We can not find in history any reference to anything even remotely resembling the situation in which France is likely to find herself as a result of a German defeat . Furthermore , we don ’ t even know what that situation will be . All we know is that it will be an unprecedented one . Thus , even if we knew how an inspiration can be breathed into a country , we should still not know how to proceed in the case of France . On the other hand , since it is a question of a practical problem , the knowledge of a general solution is not indispensable for dealing with a particular case . When a machine stops , a workman , a foreman or an engineer can perceive a means of making it go again without possessing any general knowledge of the principles governing the repair of machinery . The first thing to be done in such a case is to have a look at the machine . Nevertheless , in order to look at it to some purpose , one must carry in one ’ s mind a definite notion of mechanical relationships . In the same way , looking on day by day at the changing situation in France , one must carry in one ’ s mind a definite notion of public action as a mode of education for the country . It is not enough to have perceived such a notion , given it one ’ s attention , understood it ; it must be given a permanent place in the mind , so that it may be present even when one ’ s attention is directed towards something else . It demands an all the greater effort seeing that it is , for us , a completely new idea . Since the Renaissance , public activities have never been visualized in this light , but solely as a means of establishing a particular form of power regarded as desirable for one reason or another . Education—whether its object be children or adults , individuals or an entire people , or even oneself—consists in creating motives . To show what is beneficial , what is obligatory , what is good—that is the task of education . Education concerns itself with the motives for effective action . For no action is ever carried out in the absence of motives capable of supplying the indispensable amount of energy for its execution . To want to direct human creatures—others or oneself—towards the good by simply pointing out the direction , without making sure the necessary motives have been provided , is as if one tried , by pressing down the accelerator , to set off in a motor-car with an empty petrol tank . Or again , it is as if one were to try to light an oil lamp without having put in any oil . This mistake was pointed out in a celebrated passage that has been read , re-read and alluded to over and over again for the last twenty centuries . In spite of which , we still go on making it . It is fairly easy to classify the means of education contained in public action : First , fear and hope , brought about by threats and promises . Suggestion . Expression , either officially or under official sanction , of some of the thoughts which , before ever being publicly expressed , were already in the hearts of the people , or in the hearts of certain active elements in the nation . Example . The modalities themselves of action , and those of organizations created for purposes of action . The first means is the grossest , and it is always employed . The second is also employed by everybody nowadays : it is the one in the handling of which Hitler has displayed such genius . The other three are unknown . We must try to conceive them in relation to the three successive forms our public action is capable of assuming : its present form ; the actual taking over of power at the moment of liberation ; and the exercise of power on a provisional basis during the immediately succeeding months after liberation . At present we have only two mediatory instruments at our disposal , the radio and the underground movement . For the great mass of French people , it is practically the radio alone which counts . The third of the five means enumerated above must on no account be confused with the second . Suggestion constitutes , as Hitler saw , an ascendancy . It is a form of coercion . A great part of its efficacity is due , on the one hand to repetition , and on the other hand to the strength at the command of the group whence the suggestion originates , or which it aims to acquire . The efficacity of the third means is of an altogether different kind . Its foundations are laid in the hidden structure of human nature . It sometimes happens that a thought , either formulated to oneself or not formulated at all , works secretly on the mind and yet has but little direct influence over it . If one hears this thought expressed publicly by some other person , and especially by some one whose words are listened to with respect , its force is increased an hundredfold and can sometimes bring about an inner transformation . It can also happen that one needs , whether one realizes it or not , to hear certain words , which , if they are effectively pronounced , and in a quarter whence one would normally expect good to come from , infuse comfort , energy and as it were a food . In private life these two word functions are theoretically filled by friends or natural guides , though , in fact , rarely enough . But there are certain occasions when the march of public events occupies so much more important a place in the personal life of each of us than does the course of individual affairs , that a number of hidden thoughts and hidden needs of this sort are found to be the same with practically all the human beings which go to make up a people . This provides the opportunity for carrying out an action , which , while it is directed towards a whole people , remains essentially a personal , not a collective , one . Thus , far from stifling the resources concealed in the depths of each mind , which is what all collective action , in the nature of things , inevitably does , however lofty the ends pursued may be , this type of action awakens them , stirs them up and stimulates their growth . But who or what is able to exercise such an action ? In normal circumstances , there is perhaps nowhere whence it could be exercised . Very powerful obstacles stand in the way of its being done , save partially and to a feeble extent , by any government . Other obstacles make it similarly difficult for it to be done anywhere than by the State . However , from this point of view , the circumstances in which France actually finds herself happen to be wonderfully , providentially favourable . From many other points of view it has been disastrous that France should not have had , like other countries , a regular government in London . But from this point of view it is exceptionally fortunate ; and it is even fortunate from this point of view that the North African affair should not have led to the transformation of the National Committee into a regular government . The hatred of the State , which has existed in a latent , secret , but very powerful form in France since the days of Charles VI , makes it impossible for words emanating directly from a government to be welcomed by every individual Frenchman like the voice of a friend . On the other hand , in an action of this kind , words must have an official character if they are to be really effective . The leaders of Fighting France constitute something analogous to a government to the precise degree necessary so that their words should have an official character . The movement preserves enough of its original nature—that of a revolt springing up out of the depths of a few faithful hearts acting completely independently—for the words which issue from it to have in the ears of every Frenchman the close , intimate , warm and tender accents of the voice of a friend . And above all General de Gaulle , surrounded by those who have followed him , is a symbol . He symbolizes France ’ s faithfulness to herself , which for a moment was concentrated almost entirely in him , and above all everything in Man which revolts against the servile adoration of force . Everything spoken in his name has , in France , the authority attaching to a symbol . Consequently , whoever speaks in that name can , as he chooses , and according to what seems to be best at the particular time in question , take his inspiration from the level of those feelings and thoughts which are actually simmering in the minds of Frenchmen , or from a higher level , and in that case as high a level as he wishes ; there being nothing to prevent him taking it sometimes from that region situated above the skies . Just as much as it would be out of place for such words to issue from a government necessarily tainted by all the meannesses associated with the exercise of power , so it is in order in the case of words emanating from a symbol which represents what is highest in the eyes of every individual . A government which uses words , thoughts too lofty for it , far from gaining any prestige thereby , discredits them and at the same time makes itself ridiculous . That is what happened in connexion with the principles of 1789 and the formula ‘ Liberty , Equality , Fraternity ’ during the course of the Third Republic . That is what also happened as regards the words , often in themselves of a very high moral level , proclaimed by the so-called National Revolution.1 In the latter case , it is true , the stigma of the betrayal caused them to be discredited with a lightning rapidity . But almost certainly the same thing would have happened even otherwise , though much more slowly . The French movement in London has at this moment , but not for long perhaps , this extraordinary privilege that being to a large extent symbolical , it is able to disseminate the most lofty inspirations without discrediting them or impropriety on its part . Thus , out of the very unreality which has been its lot since the beginning—on account of the initial isolation in which those who launched it found themselves—it can draw , if it knows how to make use of it , a far greater abundance of reality . ‘ His strength is made perfect in weakness ’ , says St. Paul . It is a strange blindness that has brought about in a situation charged with such marvellous possibilities the desire to descend to the vulgar , banal position of an émigré government . It is providential that this desire has not been satisfied . In regard to foreign countries , moreover , the situation offers similar advantages . Since 1789 , France has , in fact , occupied a unique place among the nations . This is something recent ; for 1789 is not far away . From the end of the fourteenth century , which witnessed the most ferocious repressions carried out in the Flemish and French cities under the minority of Charles VI , up to 1789 , France had scarcely represented in the eyes of the foreigner , from the political point of view , anything other than the tyranny of absolutism and the servility of a subject people . When du Bellay wrote : ‘ France , mère des arts , des armes et des lois ’ , the last word was de trop . As Montesquieu so ably pointed out , and as Retz before him had explained with such marvellous lucidity , there were no laws at all in France from the death of Charles VI onwards . Between 1715 and 1789 , France , filled with an humble enthusiasm , went to school in England . At that time , the English seemed to be the only people worthy of the name of citizens in the midst of slave populations . But after 1792 , when France , having stirred the hearts of all the oppressed , found herself engaged in a war in which she had England for an enemy , all the prestige attaching to the ideas of justice and liberty was concentrated on her ; with the result that during the following century a species of exaltation filled the French people which other peoples didn ’ t experience directly , but caught from the French its illuminating beam . The French Revolution , unfortunately enough , was responsible for such a violent break with the past all over the European continent that any tradition going back to 1789 is in practice equivalent to one stemming from antiquity . The war of 1870 showed what France meant in the eyes of the world . In that war , the French were the aggressors , in spite of the Ems despatch ruse ; indeed , this ruse is itself proof that the aggression came from the French side . The Germans , disunited as they were , and shuddering still at the memory of Napoleon , expected to be invaded . They were very surprised to find cutting into France was like cutting into a pile of butter . But they were still more surprised to find themselves an object of horror in the eyes of Europe , when their only fault had been to defend themselves victoriously . But the vanquished country was France , and in spite of Napoleon , and because of 1789 , that was enough to cause the victors to be regarded with horror . One can see in the personal diary of the Prince Imperial , Frederick , what a painful surprise for the best of the Germans was this , to them , incomprehensible condemnation . Perhaps it is possible to date from that time the German inferiority complex , an apparently contradictory mixture of a bad conscience and the feeling that they are suffering from an injustice , and their ferocious reaction to it . At all events , from that moment , it was the Prussian who , in the European consciousness , took the place of what had hitherto been looked upon as the typical German , namely , a dreamy , blue-eyed musician , gutmütig , a pipe-smoker and beer-drinker , completely harmless—the type which is still found in the pages of Balzac . And Germany went on becoming more and more like this new picture of herself . France underwent a hardly less serious moral injury . Her recovery after 1871 is admired . But it is not seen at what a price it was achieved . France had become a realist . She had ceased to believe in herself . The massacre during the Commune , so startling by reason of the number of victims and its ferocious character , gave the workmen the permanent feeling that they were outcasts in their own country , and the middle class , as a result of a bad conscience , a sort of physical fear of the workmen . This was still evident in June 1936 ; 2 and the collapse in June 1940 is in a sense a direct result of that extraordinarily brief yet bloody civil war of May 1871 , which continued secretly for nearly three-quarters of a century . The consequence was that the feeling of friendship between the youth of the big Ecoles3 and the people , from which feeling the whole of French nineteenth century thought had derived , as it were , its nourishment , became nothing but a memory . On the other hand , the humiliation of the defeat turned the thoughts of middle-class youth , by a process of reaction , towards a thoroughly mediocre conception of national greatness . Obsessed by the conquest she had suffered and which had belittled her in her own eyes , France no longer felt capable of any vocation higher than that of conquering in her turn . Thus France became just like any other nation , thinking only of carving out for herself her share of black or yellow human flesh and of obtaining for herself the hegemony of Europe . After a life of such intense exaltation , the sudden drop to such a low level could not take place without precipitating a profound malaise . June 1940 marks the extreme limit reached by this malaise . It must be said at once , because it is true , that after the disaster the first reaction on the part of France was to vomit up her own past , her immediate past . This was not the result of Vichy propaganda . On the contrary , it was the cause of the National Revolution having , to begin with , an appearance of success . And it was a right and wholesome reaction . The only side to the disaster which could be looked upon as a good thing was the opportunity it afforded to vomit up a past of which it was itself the final outcome ; a past during which France had done nothing except claim the privileges consonant with a mission that she had renounced because she didn ’ t believe in it any longer . Abroad , the collapse of France was only deeply felt in places where the spirit of 1789 had left behind a legacy . The temporary laying low of France as a nation gives her the opportunity of becoming once again among the nations what she was in the past , and what for a long time now people were hoping to see her become again—an inspiration . And for France to be able to recover her prestige in the world—a prestige which is indispensable to the very health of her inner life—she must become an inspiration before she has become again , thanks to the defeat of her enemies , a nation . Afterwards , it would probably be impossible for several reasons . There again , the French movement in London is in the best possible position imaginable , if only it knows how to make use of it . The movement is neither more nor less official than what is required in order to be able to speak in the name of the country . Not possessing any governmental authority—even a nominal , fictitious authority—over the French people , based entirely upon free consent , it has something of a spiritual power about it . The unswerving loyalty displayed in the darkest hours , the blood spilt freely every day in its name , give it the right freely to use the most exalted words in the language . Its position is exactly as it should be for making known to the world the voice of France ; a voice whose authority is not based on physical power , which was destroyed by the defeat , nor on glory , which was wiped out in shame ; but , first , on an elevated plane of thought in keeping with the present tragedy , and , secondly , on a spiritual tradition graven in the hearts of all peoples . It is not difficult to define this movement ’ s double mission : to help France to discover in the depths of her misfortune an inspiration in keeping with her genius and with the actual needs of mankind in distress , and to spread this inspiration , once recovered or at any rate glimpsed , throughout the world . If we stick to this double mission , many things of a less lofty order will be granted to us in addition ; if we stick in the first place to these lesser things , even they will be refused to us . Naturally , it is not just a question of a verbal inspiration . Every real inspiration passes into the muscles and emerges in the form of actions ; and at the present time the only actions possible to Frenchmen are those which contribute towards driving out the enemy . All the same , it would be wrong to suppose that the only mission of the French movement in London lay in raising the energy of the French to the highest possible pitch in their struggle against the enemy . Its mission is to help France to find again a genuine inspiration , which , because of its very genuineness , naturally finds an outlet in efforts and acts of heroism on behalf of the liberation of the country . This doesn ’ t amount to the same thing . It is because it is necessary to carry out a mission of so lofty a nature that the clumsy but efficacious means of threats , promises and suggestions would not be adequate . On the other hand , the use of words answering the secret thoughts and needs of the human beings composing the French people is a method marvellously well adapted to the task to be accomplished , provided it be used in the correct manner . For that , there must first of all be in France a receiving organization , that is to say , people whose primary duty it is to discover these secret thoughts , these secret needs , and pass the information on to London . What is indispensable for this task is a passionate interest in human beings , whoever they may be , and in their minds and souls ; the ability to place oneself in their position and to recognize by signs thoughts which go unexpressed ; a certain intuitive sense of history in process of being enacted ; and the faculty of expressing in writing delicate shades of meaning and complex relationships . In view of the extent and complexity of the field to be kept under observation , there ought to be a good many of these observers ; but in fact that is impossible . However , anybody who can be used in this way should be used at once , without exception . On the supposition that there exists a receiving organization in France , an inadequate—it can not be otherwise—but a genuine one , the next operation , by far the more important of the two , takes place in London . It consists in making a selection , in being able to mould the spirit of the country . The knowledge of what words are likely to find an echo in the hearts of Frenchmen , because they correspond to something which is already there—that knowledge is solely one of fact . It contains no indication at all of a good objective , and politics , like every human activity , is an activity directed towards a good objective . The state of mind of the French is nothing else than a fact . In principle it constitutes something that is neither good nor bad ; in fact it is made up of a mixture of good and bad , according to proportions which can vary greatly . That is a self-evident truth , but one which it is as well to remind oneself of , because the sentimental feelings which naturally correspond to a state of exile might cause it to be more or less forgotten . From among all the words likely to awaken an echo in the hearts of the French , the ones to choose are those which it is right to wish should be echoed ; they ought to be repeated over and over again , leaving out the others , so as to bring about the disappearance of what may advantageously be made to disappear . What criteria of selection should be adopted ? One can think of two . First , the good , in the spiritual sense of the word ; secondly , the useful—that is to say , of course , useful from the point of view of the war and the national interests of France . In connexion with the first criterion , there is to start with a postulate to be considered . It must be weighed very carefully , very deliberately , in one ’ s mind and conscience , then adopted or rejected once and for all . A Christian can not do otherwise than adopt it . It is the postulate that what is spiritually good is good in every respect , at all times , in all places , under all circumstances . It is what Christ expressed in the words : ‘ Do men gather grapes of thorns , or figs of thistles ? Even so every good tree bringeth forth good fruit ; but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit . A good tree can not bring forth evil fruit , neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. ’ 4 The meaning of these words is this . Above the earthly , carnal sphere in which our thoughts habitually move , and which is on every side an inextricable mixture of good and evil , there is another , a spiritual sphere , where good is only good and , even at the inferior level , produces only good ; where evil is only evil and can produce nothing but evil . It is a direct consequence of faith in God . The absolute good is not only the very best good of all—it would then be a relative good—but the unique , total good , which comprises within itself in a superlative degree all forms of the good , including those which are sought by men who deviate from the path of absolute good . All forms of pure good issuing directly from the absolute good possess similar properties to the latter . And so amongst the list of echoes capable of being awakened in French hearts by London , we must first of all choose everything which is purely and genuinely good , without the slightest consideration for expediency , applying no other test than that of genuineness ; and we must let them have all that very often , untiringly , using words as simple and clear-cut as possible . Naturally , everything which is only concerned with evil , hatred , meanness must in like manner be rejected , without any consideration for expediency . There remain the medium-quality motives , which are inferior to spiritual good without being of themselves necessarily bad , and in connexion with which the question of expediency arises . In the case of each of these , a thorough examination must be made if possible , going really carefully into the subject , of all the effects it is likely to produce in this , that or the other respect ; this , that or the other possible bunch of circumstances . Unless this precaution is taken , one might by mistake encourage what one didn ’ t want instead of what one did . For example , after 1918 , pacifists thought they ought to appeal to the love of security , of comfort , in order to be readily listened to . They thus hoped to attain sufficient influence to be able to direct the country ’ s foreign policy , in which case they reckoned they would direct it in such a way as to ensure peace . They didn ’ t ask themselves what the consequences of such incitations would be should they attain an influential position which yet was not enough to place the direction of foreign policy in their hands . If they had only asked themselves this question , the answer would at once have been plain to them . In such an event , the incitations in question would be unable either to prevent or to postpone war , but only make it possible for any war to be won by the more aggressive , the more bellicose side , and so bring into disrepute for a long time to come the love of peace itself . It may be observed , incidentally , that in the very working of democratic institutions , according to our notions , there lies a perpetual open invitation to commit this sort of criminal and fatal negligence . To avoid committing it , in the case of every incitation we must say to ourselves : this incitation is able to produce certain effects in this , that or the other social group , and in what other ones besides ? It is able to produce certain effects in this , that or the other sphere ; and in what other ones besides ? This , that or the other situation is able to result ; what other ones besides ? In each case , what effects would it be likely to produce in each group , in each sphere , at once , a little later , or later on still ? In what respects would each of these possible effects be beneficial , in what respects detrimental ? What appears to be the degree of probability in the case of each of these possibilities ? We must carefully consider each of these points and all of them together ; suspend for a moment any inclination to choose between them ; then decide , and , as in all human decisions , run the risk of making a mistake . Having made our choice , we must put it to a practical test , and , of course , the registering apparatus set up in France will endeavour to perceive progressively the results obtained . But words are only a beginning . Action is a more powerful tool for moulding people ’ s minds . It possesses a double property with respect to incitations . To begin with , an incitation only becomes real to the mind when it has brought about an action performed by the body . It isn ’ t enough to foster this , that or the other incitation , actual or embryonic , in the hearts of Frenchmen , counting upon the latter to translate of their own accord their own incitations into actions . We must , in addition , from London , as far as is humanly possible , as continuously as possible , with the greatest possible number of details , and by every appropriate means , radio or otherwise , suggest actions . A soldier once said , recounting his own behaviour during a campaign : ‘ I obeyed all the orders , but I felt how impossible it would have been for me , how infinitely above what my courage was capable of , to place myself voluntarily and without orders in the path of danger ’ . A very profound truth is contained in that remark . An order is an incredibly efficacious stimulant . Under certain circumstances , it contains within itself the energy necessary for carrying out the action which it lays down . Incidentally , to find out what these circumstances are , what it is which determines them , what different aspects they can assume , and to draw up a complete list of them , would provide one with a key for the solution of the most essential and most urgent problems of war and politics . Any clearly recognized responsibility , imposing certain precise and absolutely strict obligations , incites one to brave danger in the same way as an order . It only makes its presence felt once the action is in full swing and as a result of the particular circumstances corresponding to the latter . The ability to recognize such a responsibility is all the greater according to the superior degree of intelligence ; it depends still more on intellectual honesty , an infinitely precious virtue which prevents one from lying to oneself in order to avoid discomfort . Those who are able to expose themselves to danger without the constraint imposed by an order or some definite responsibility are of three kinds . Those who have a lot of natural courage , with a temperament to a large extent a stranger to fear and an imagination little exposed to nightmarish impressions ; such people often go to meet danger lightheartedly , in an adventurous spirit , without paying much attention to the precise sort of danger involved . Those who find it difficult to display courage , but who derive the necessary impetus to do so from impure motives . Medal-hunting , vengeance , hatred are examples of this type of motive ; there are a great many more , and they vary very much according to different characters and sets of circumstances . Those who obey a direct and individual order come from God . This last case is not so rare as one might be led to suppose ; for where it exists it is often hidden , even hidden from the individual himself concerned , those whose case it is being sometimes numbered among the ones who think they don ’ t believe in God . All the same , though less rare than one supposes , it is , unfortunately , not very frequent . The two other categories have a courage which , while often very spectacular and rewarded by the name of heroism , is very inferior in human quality to that of the soldier who obeys the orders of his superiors . The French movement in London possesses exactly the requisite degree of official character for its directives to have the stimulating properties attaching to orders , yet without diminishing that sort of pure and lucid frenzy which accompanies the free acceptance of sacrifice . Its opportunities and corresponding responsibilities are , therefore , immense . The more actions there are in France carried out by its orders , the more people there are acting under its orders , the more chance France will have of recovering a spirit which will enable her to make a triumphant re-entry into the war—not only militarily speaking , but spiritually speaking also—and to set about the reconstruction of the country after the war . Over and above the question of number , it is the choice of actions which is essential . It is essential from several points of view , some of which are so highly important that the present partitioning which places this sphere entirely in the hands of technicians in the subversive arts must be looked upon as disastrous . Speaking quite generally , in any sort of sphere , it is inevitable that evil should dominate wherever the technical side of things is either completely or almost completely sovereign . Technicians always tend to make themselves sovereign , because they feel they alone know what they are about ; and this is perfectly natural on their part . The responsibility for any evil overtaking them , as a necessary consequence , has to be exclusively borne by those who have allowed them full rein . When they are allowed to have full rein , it is always solely for want of keeping continually in mind a clear and absolutely precise conception of the particular ends to which this , that or the other technique should be subordinated . The direction given by London to the action being carried out in France must correspond to a series of different objectives . The most obvious is the strictly military and immediate objective , as far as information and sabotage are concerned . In regard to this , the French in London can only act as a connecting link between England ’ s requirements and the goodwill of the French in France . The extreme importance of such matters is obvious , when one considers how it becomes clearer and clearer every day that it is communications far more than battles which is going to be decisive in this war . The twin proposition locomotives-sabotage is proportionately identical with the twin proposition boatsubmarine . The destruction of locomotives is as important as that of submarines ; the relationship between these two forms of destruction being that of offensive and defensive action . The disorganization of production is no less essential . The volume , the amount of our influence on the action being carried out in France depends chiefly on the material means placed at our disposal by the British . Our influence over France , the influence we already possess and still more the influence we are able to acquire , can be of immense service to the British . There is thus a mutual need of each other ’ s services ; but ours is by far the greater , at least so far as the immediate future is concerned , which is too often the only aspect considered . Such being the case , if between them and us there do not exist not only good , but warm , genuinely friendly and in some sort intimate relations , that is something which can not be allowed to continue and must be made to cease immediately . Wherever human relations are not what they should be , there is generally fault to be found on both sides . But it is always far more to the purpose to consider one ’ s own faults , so as to put a stop to them , than those of the other party . Besides , the need is far greater on our side—at any rate the immediate need . And then , we are émigrés who have been given shelter , and so we owe them a debt of gratitude . Lastly , it is a well-known fact that the British have no aptitude for getting outside their skins and placing themselves in the position of other people ; their best qualities , their particular function on this planet , are almost incompatible with the possession of such an aptitude . The same aptitude is actually , and unfortunately , almost as rare with us ; but it belongs in the nature of things to what is recognized as being France ’ s vocation . For all these reasons , it is for us to make the necessary effort to bring our relations up to a suitable degree of warmth ; a sincere desire on our part to understand—free , naturally , from any suspicion of servility—must pierce beneath their reserve to the real capacity for friendship which it conceals . Personal feelings play in all big world events a part that can never be discerned to its full extent . The fact that a state of friendship exists or doesn ’ t exist between two men , or two groups of men , can in certain cases prove decisive for the destiny of the human race . This is perfectly understandable . A truth can only present itself to the mind of a particular human being . How is he going to communicate it ? If he tries to expound it , he won ’ t be listened to ; for other people have never heard of that particular truth , won ’ t recognize it as such ; they won ’ t realize that what he is saying is true ; they won ’ t pay enough attention to enable them to see that it is so ; for they won ’ t have received any inducement to make the necessary effort of concentration . But friendship , admiration , sympathy or any other sort of benevolent feeling would naturally predispose them to give a certain amount of their attention . A man who has something new to say—for as far as platitudes are concerned no effort of attention is necessary—can only be listened to , to begin with , by those that love him . So it is that the transmission of truths among men depends entirely on the state of their feelings ; and the same applies to no matter what kind of truth . With exiles who are ever thinking of their country—and those who forget it are lost—the heart is so irresistibly turned towards the homeland in distress that few emotional resources are left for friendship for the land they happen to be living in . Such friendship can not really germinate and spring up in their hearts unless they do themselves a sort of violence . But this violence is an obligation on their part . Frenchmen who are in London have no more imperative obligation towards the French people , who live with their eyes turned in their direction , than that of seeing that between themselves and the élite of Englishmen there exists a real , living , warm , close and effective friendship . Apart from strategic utility , still further considerations should play their part in the choice of actions to be undertaken . They are of far greater importance even , but come second in order , because strategic utility is a necessary condition for giving reality to the action in question ; where it is absent , there is confusion , non-action , and the indirect virtue of action , which gives it its chief value , is likewise absent . This indirect virtue is , once again , a double one . Action gives the fullness of reality to the incitations which have inspired it . The expression of such incitations , as heard on the outside , only gives them as yet a semi-reality . Action possesses a virtue of quite another order . Many different feelings can co-exist in the heart . The choice of those which must , after having been discovered in the hearts of Frenchmen , be accorded the degree of reality which official expression confers—that choice is already limited by questions of material necessity . If , for example , you speak to the French every evening for a quarter of an hour , and if you are obliged to repeat yourself frequently because jamming makes it impossible to be certain of having been heard , and because in any case repetition is a pedagogical necessity , you are only able to say a limited number of things . As soon as you step into the sphere of action , the limits are even narrower . You are obliged to effect a new choice , in accordance with the criteria already outlined above . The manner in which an incitation becomes transformed into an act is something that requires to be studied . The same act may be produced by this , that or the other incitation , or by a mixture of incitations ; on the other hand , some other incitation may not be capable of producing it . To bring people not only to carry out a given action , but , furthermore , to carry it out under the impulse of a given incitation , the best means , perhaps the only means , appears to consist in the association established between the two by means of speech . That is to say that , each time a certain action is advised by radio , this advice should be accompanied by one or more incitations towards it ; each time the advice is repeated , the incitation , or incitations , should again be mentioned . It is true that precise instructions are communicated by means other than the radio . But they ought all to be backed up by words of encouragement transmitted by radio , bearing on the same subject , to be specified only in so far as discretion permits ; minus the details , but plus the mention of incitations . Action possesses a second virtue within the sphere of incitations . It not only confers reality upon incitations which , previously , existed in a semi-phantasmal state : it also causes incitations and feelings to arise in the mind which previously didn ’ t exist at all . That happens every time either the enthusiasm of the moment or the force of circumstances causes the action to go beyond the sum total of energy contained in the incitation which has produced the action . This mechanism—knowledge of which is as essential for the conduct of one ’ s own life as for its action upon men in general—is equally capable of producing evil or good . For instance , it often happens that in a family a chronic invalid , tenderly nursed as a result of a sincere affection , ends up by arousing among his relatives a secret , hidden hostility , because they have been obliged to expend more energy on him than was contained in their affection for him . Among the common people , on whom such obligations , added to habitual sources of fatigue , weigh so heavily , the impression is sometimes conveyed of insensibility , or even of cruelty , incomprehensible to an outsider . It is for this reason that , as Gringoire5 so charitably remarked on one occasion , cases of child martyrdom are more often found among the common people than elsewhere . The resources which this mechanism possesses for producing good are illustrated in an admirable Buddhist tale . A Buddhist tradition has it that Buddha promised to cause whoever should pronounce his name with the desire to be saved to ascend to heaven and join him there . On this tradition rests the practice known as ‘ reciting the name of the Lord ’ , which consists in repeating a certain number of times a few Sanskrit , Chinese or Japanese syllables meaning : ‘ Glory to the Lord of Light ’ . A young monk was anxious about the eternal salvation of his father , an old miser whose every thought was about money . The Prior of the monastery sent for the old man and promised to give him a penny every time he should recite the Lord ’ s name ; he had only to present himself every evening and tell them how many pennies were owing to him , and he would be paid on the spot . The old man , thoroughly delighted , now spent all his leisure moments in this occupation , and used to come to the monastery every evening to be paid . All of a sudden , they missed him . After a week , the Prior sent the young man to find out how his father was . It was then discovered that the old man had now become so absorbed in reciting the name of the Lord that he could no longer keep count of the number of times he did so ; which was what had prevented him from coming to claim his money . The Prior advised the young monk not to do anything further and simply to wait . Some little while afterwards , the old man arrived at the monastery with shining eyes , and related how he had had an illumination . It is to phenomena of this sort that Christ refers in his precept : ‘ Lay up to yourselves treasures in heaven … for where your treasure is , there will your heart be also ’ . Which means to say that there are certain actions which have the virtue of transporting from earth to heaven part of the love that lies in a man ’ s heart . A miser is not a miser when he first starts hoarding money . No doubt he is urged on , to begin with , by the thought of all the pleasures which money can buy . But the efforts and privations to which he daily subjects himself come to have an allurement . When the sacrifice surpasses by far the original impulse , the treasure , the object of his sacrifices , becomes for him an end in itself , and he subordinates himself to it . The collector ’ s mania rests upon a similar mechanism . A host of other examples might be cited . Thus , when the sacrifices made on behalf of an object greatly surpass the impulse which induced them , the result is , as regards this object , either a movement of repulsion or else an attachment of a new and more intense kind , unconnected with the initial impulse . In the second case , the result is either good or bad according to the nature of the object . If in the case of the invalid there is often repulsion , that is because this type of effort doesn ’ t lead to anything ; there is no external result to show for the internal accumulation of fatigue . The miser , on the other hand , is able to watch his treasure grow . There are also , however , situations , combinations of character , which makes it so that a family invalid inspires , on the contrary , a fanatical attachment . By investigating all this sufficiently thoroughly , one would doubtless be able to discern the appropriate laws . But even a summary acquaintance with these phenomena can furnish us with certain practical rules . In order to avoid the effect of repulsion , the possible exhaustion of incitations must be foreseen ; from time to time the authority of official utterance must be lent to new incitations for carrying out the same actions , to incitations representing what has been able to germinate in the secret places of the heart . Above all , we must see to it that the transference mechanism which attaches the miser to his treasure works in such a way as to produce good and not evil ; avoid or at least limit to the strictest minimum all the evil which could thus be brought about . It is not difficult to understand how . The mechanism in question consists in this , that an action , after having been conducted with difficulty from motives unrelated to itself , becomes by itself an object of attachment . The result is either good or evil , according to whether the action is in itself a good or an evil one . If you kill German soldiers in order to serve France and then at the end of a certain time you acquire a taste for assassinating human beings , it is clearly an evil thing . If , in order to serve France , you offer your assistance to workmen avoiding transportation to Germany and then at the end of a certain time you acquire a taste for helping those in misfortune , it is clearly a good thing . Not every case is so clear as are the above two , but all can be examined in this fashion . Moreover , all things being equal , one should always choose methods of action which contain in themselves an impulsion towards the good . Indeed , one should even do so very often when all things are not equal . It should be done not only because the purpose served is a good one , which would be a sufficient reason , but because it is a useful one into the bargain . Evil becomes an operative motive far more easily than good ; but once pure good has become an operative motive in the mind , it forms there the fount of a uniform and inexhaustible impulsion , which is never so in the case of evil . It is quite possible for one to become a double-acting secret service agent out of patriotism , in order the better to serve one ’ s country by deceiving the enemy . But if the efforts expended in this form of activity are in excess of the energy supplied by the patriotic motive , and if one later on acquires a taste for this form of activity for its own sake , there comes a time almost inevitably when one no longer knows oneself whom one is serving and whom one is deceiving , when one is ready to serve or to deceive anybody . On the other hand , if out of patriotism one is impelled to perform actions which cause the love of some higher good than that of one ’ s country to take root and develop , then the mind takes on that cast which produces martyrs , and the country reaps the benefit . Faith is more realist than is realist policy . Whoever isn ’ t convinced of this doesn ’ t possess faith . One should therefore examine and weigh extremely carefully , each time looking at the problem from every angle , the several methods of action which go to form the subversive resistance movement in France . Careful observations on the spot , carried out solely from this point of view , are indispensable in this connexion . Nor should we rule out the possibility of its being necessary to invent new forms of action , bearing in mind at the same time the above considerations and immediate objectives . ( For instance , the immediate setting afoot of a vast conspiracy to destroy all official documents relating to the control of individuals by the State , which destruction can be carried out by very varied means , such as provoking fires , etc.—that is something which could have very great immediate and long-term advantages . ) A degree of reality superior even to that of action is attained by the organization which co-ordinates actions , when such an organization has not been formed artificially , but has grown up like a plant in the midst of day-to-day necessities , having at the same time been moulded with patient vigilance and with some particular good clearly kept in view . This constitutes , perhaps , the highest possible degree of reality . Organizations already exist in France . But there are also—which is of infinitely greater interest still—embryonic , germinal , roughly sketched organizations in process of growth . They must be examined , viewed on the spot , and the authority emanating from London must be used like a tool to shape them discreetly and patiently , like a sculptor who divines the shape contained in the block of marble in order to bring it forth . This shaping must be guided at once by immediate and non-immediate considerations . Everything that has been said hitherto about verbal propositions and action applies equally here . An organization which can crystallize and seize upon the words launched officially , translate their inspiration into different words entirely of its own , realize them in co-ordinated actions for which it offers an ever-increasing guarantee of efficacity ; can be a living , warm environment , full of friendly intercourse , companionship and kindness—that is the sort of humus in which the unfortunate French , uprooted by the disaster , can live and find their salvation both in war and in peace . It must be done now . Once victory is attained , in the irresistible unleashing of individual appetites seeking happiness or power , it will be absolutely impossible to start anything of the kind . It must be done immediately . It is something indescribably urgent . To miss the opportunity now would be to lay oneself open to what would almost amount perhaps to criminal guilt . The unique source of salvation and greatness for France lies in regaining contact with her genius in the depths of her distress . This must be accomplished now , immediately ; whilst the distress is still a crushing one ; whilst France still has before her , in the future , the opportunity of making real the first conscious glimmerings of her recovered genius by expressing them through warlike action . After victory has been won , this opportunity would no longer exist , and peace would not offer its equivalent . For it is infinitely more difficult to imagine , to conceive a peacetime action than it is a wartime one . In order to penetrate and infuse a peacetime action , an inspiration must already have a high degree of consciousness , radiance , reality . Such will only be the case with France , when peace dawns , if the last phase of the war has produced this effect . The war must be made the teacher to develop and nourish this inspiration ; and for this to happen a deep , authentic inspiration , a veritable illumination of the spirit must arise whilst the war is in full swing . France must once more be fully present in this war , share in the victory at the cost of her blood ; but that is not enough . Such a thing could take place in the shadows , and the real profit derived therefrom would then be small . What is wanted besides is that what goes to nourish her war effort should be nothing less than her veritable genius , discovered once more in the depths of her misfortune , although with an inevitably weak proportion of consciousness at first , after such a night . The war itself can then fan it into a flame . The true mission of the French movement in London is , by reason even of the military and political circumstances , a spiritual mission before being a military and political one . It could be defined as being that of director of conscience on a national plane . The mode of political action outlined in these pages requires that every choice made be preceded by the simultaneous review of several considerations of a very different nature . This implies a high degree of concentration , more or less of the same standard as that required for creative work in art or science . But why should politics , which decide the fate of peoples and whose object is justice , demand any less concentration than art or science , whose respective objects are beauty and truth ? Politics have a very close affinity to art—to arts such as poetry , music and architecture . Simultaneous composition on several planes at once is the law of artistic creation , and wherein , in fact , lies its difficulty . A poet , in the arrangement of words and the choice of each word , must simultaneously bear in mind matters on at least five or six different planes of composition . The rules of versification—number of syllables and rhymes—in the poetic form he has chosen ; the grammatical sequence of words ; their logical sequence from the point of view of the development of his thought ; the purely musical sequence of sounds contained in the syllables ; the so to speak material rhythm formed by pauses , stops , duration of each syllable and of each group of syllables ; the atmosphere with which each word is surrounded by the possibilities of suggestion it contains , and the transition from one atmosphere to another as fast as the words succeed each other ; the psychological rhythm produced by the duration of words corresponding to such and such an atmosphere or such and such a movement of thought ; the effects of repetition and novelty ; doubtless other things besides ; and finally a unique intuition for beauty which gives all this a unity . Inspiration is a tension on the part of the soul ’ s faculties which renders possible the indispensable degree of concentration required for composition on a multiple plane . Whoever finds himself incapable of such concentration will one day acquire the capacity for it , if he perseveres humbly and patiently , and if he is impelled by a violent and unshakable desire . If he is not the prey of such a desire , it is not absolutely imperative that he should make verses . Politics , in their turn , form an art governed by composition on a multiple plane . Whoever finds himself with political responsibilities , if in his heart he hungers and thirsts after justice , must desire to possess this faculty of composition on a multiple plane , and consequently is bound , in the end , to receive it . However , at the moment , there is no time to lose . A host of things need urgent attention . The method of political action outlined here goes beyond the possibilities of the human intelligence , at least as far as those possibilities are known . But it is precisely that which lends it its value . It is no use asking ourselves whether we are or are not capable of applying it . The answer would always be no . It is something which must be perfectly clearly conceived in the mind , pondered over long and often , planted permanently in that part of the mind where thoughts take root , and brought up whenever decisions have to be taken . There is then , perhaps , the chance that the decisions , though imperfect , will be good ones . Whoever writes verse with the ambition of composing as beautiful lines as those of Racine , will never write a beautiful line ; and still less so if he doesn ’ t even harbour that hope . In order to write verse that contains some beauty , one must have had the ambition to equal by the arrangement of words that pure and divine beauty which , according to Plato , lies on the other side of the skies . One of the fundamental truths of Christianity is that progress towards a lesser imperfection is not produced by the desire for a lesser imperfection . Only the desire for perfection has the virtue of being able to destroy in the soul some part of the evil which defiles it . Hence Christ ’ s commandment : ‘ Be ye therefore perfect , even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect ’ . To the extent to which human language falls short of divine beauty , to that extent Man ’ s sentient and intellectual faculties fall short of truth , and the necessities of social life fall short of justice . Consequently , politics can not but be as much in need of efforts of creative invention as are art and science . That is why almost the entire sum of political opinions and discussions in which these opinions get bandied about has as little to do with politics as has the clash of aesthetic opinions in the cafés of Montparnasse to do with art . The politician in the one case , as the artist in the other , can only find in such activity a certain stimulant , which ought to be taken in very small doses . Politics are practically never looked upon as an art of so high a category . But that is because we have for centuries been accustomed to regard them solely , or at least principally , as a technique for acquiring and holding on to power . Now , power is not an end . By nature , in essence and by definition , it constitutes exclusively a means . It is to politics what a piano is to musical composition . A composer who requires a piano in order to be able to invent his melodies will find himself in an embarrassing situation if he happens to be staying in a village where there isn ’ t one . But if one is procured for him , it is then up to him to compose . Fools that we are , we had confused the manufacture of a piano with the composition of a sonata . An educational method which is not inspired by the conception of a certain form of human perfection is not worth very much . When it is a matter of educating a whole people , this conception should be that of a civilization . It must not be sought in the past , which only contains imperfect models ; far less still in our dreams of the future , which are necessarily as mediocre as we ourselves are , and consequently vastly inferior to the past . The inspiration for such an education must be sought , like the method itself , among the truths eternally inscribed in the nature of things . Here are a few indications on this subject . Four obstacles above all separate us from a form of civilization likely to be worth something : our false conception of greatness ; the degradation of the sentiment of justice ; our idolization of money ; and our lack of religious inspiration . We may use the first person plural without any hesitation , for it is doubtful whether at the present moment there is a single human being on the surface of the globe who is free from that quadruple defect , and more doubtful still whether there is a single one belonging to the white race . But if there are one or two , which , in spite of everything , is to be hoped , they remain hidden . Our conception of greatness is the most serious defect of all , and the one concerning which we are least conscious that it is a defect : at least , a defect in ourselves ; for in our enemies it shocks us . But in spite of the warning contained in Christ ’ s parable of the mote and the beam , it never occurs to us to recognize it as ours . Our conception of greatness is the very one which has inspired Hitler ’ s whole life . When we denounce it without the remotest recognition of its application to ourselves , the angels must either cry or laugh , if there happen to be angels who interest themselves in our propaganda . It appears that as soon as Tripolitania was occupied , the teaching of the Fascist version of history was stopped there . That is excellent . But it would be interesting to know in what , as regards ancient times , the Fascist teaching of history differed from that of the French Republic . The difference can hardly have been very noticeable , since the great authority in republican France on matters of ancient history , J. Carcopino , gave a series of lectures in Rome on the subject of Ancient Rome and Gaul which were perfectly suitable to be given in that city and were very warmly applauded . At the present moment , the French in London hold certain things against J. Carcopino , but it is not on account of his historical views . Another historian belonging to the Sorbonne said in January 1940 to some one who had written something rather harsh about the Romans : ‘ If Italy comes in against us , you will have been right. ’ As a basis for historical judgment , it seems insufficient . Those who have been defeated often benefit from a sentimentalism which is even sometimes unjust , but only those defeated provisionally . Affliction confers an immense prestige so long as it is accompanied by strength . The affliction of the weak is not even an object of attention—when , indeed , it is not an object of repulsion . When the early Christians had become solidly convinced that Christ , in spite of having been crucified , had subsequently risen from the dead and was to return before very long in his glory to recompense his own and punish all the rest , no tortures had any further terrors for them . But previously , when Christ had only been an absolutely pure being , as soon as misfortune overtook him , he was abandoned . Those who loved him most could not find in their hearts the courage to run risks on his behalf . Torture gets the better of courage when in order to face it there isn ’ t the stimulus of a revenge . The revenge need not be a personal one . A martyred Jesuit in China is sustained by the temporal grandeur of the Church , in spite of the fact that he can not expect it to assist him personally in any way . There is no other force on this earth except force . That could serve as an axiom . As for the force which is not of this earth , contact with it can not be bought at any lesser price than the passing through a kind of death . There is not on earth any other force except force , and it is this which communicates force to the feelings , including compassion . Any number of examples could be given . Why did the pacifists after 1918 feel so much more pity for Germany than for Austria ? Why did the necessity for holidays with pay seem to so many people an axiom of mathematical clarity in 1936 and not in 1935 ? 6 Why are there so many more people who take an interest in factory workers than in agricultural workers ? And so on . The same in the case of history . The heroic resistance of the vanquished is admired when time brings with it a certain revenge , not otherwise . No compassion is felt for things which have been utterly destroyed . Who is there who accords any to Jericho , Gaza , Tyre , Sidon ; to Carthage , Numantia , Sicily under the Greeks , or Peru before the time of Columbus ? But , it will be objected , why lament the disappearance of things about which we know , as it were , nothing at all ? We know nothing about them because they have disappeared . Those who destroyed them didn ’ t consider it necessary to become the guardians of the culture they represented . Generally speaking , the most serious mistakes , those which warp completely the mental processes , destroy the soul , placing it outside the reach of truth and goodness , can not be discerned . For they are caused by the fact that certain things escape the scrutiny of the mind . If they escape such a scrutiny , how could they be scrutinized , however hard one were to try ? That is why truth is , in its essence , a supernatural good . It is the same with history . No attention is paid to the defeated . It is the scene of a Darwinian process more pitiless still than that which governs animal and vegetable life . The defeated disappear . They become naught . The Romans , so it is said , civilized Gaul . There was no art there before Gallo-Roman art ; no thought before the Gauls had the privilege of reading the philosophical productions of Cicero ; and so on . We know , as it were , nothing about Gaul ; but the scanty indications we do possess are sufficient to prove all that to be a lie . Gaulish art runs no risk of being made the subject of written accounts on the part of our archaeologists , since the material used was wood . But the town of Bourges was such a marvel of pure beauty that the Gauls lost their last campaign because they couldn ’ t find the courage to destroy it of their own accord . Caesar , of course , destroyed it , and at the same time massacred the entire forty thousand human beings found therein . We have it from Caesar that the course of study pursued by the Druids lasted twenty years , and consisted in learning by heart poems about the divine nature and the universe . Gaulish poetry must , therefore , at any rate have contained a sufficient number of religious and metaphysical poems for it to be the subject of twenty years ’ study . Compared with the incredible imaginative riches suggested by this fact alone , Latin poetry , in spite of Lucretius , seems a miserable affair . Diogenes Laërtius says that a tradition attributed several foreign origins to Greek wisdom , and amongst others the Druids of Gaul . Other texts indicate that the thought of the Druids was related to that of the Pythagoreans . Thus this people possessed a whole ocean of sacred poetry whose inspiration we are only able to form some idea of through the works of Plato . All that disappeared when the Romans wiped out the entire collection of Druids for being guilty of the crime of patriotism . It is true that the Romans put a stop to human sacrifice practised , so they said , in Gaul . We know nothing about the actual form this took , the manner and spirit in which it was practised , if it was a method of executing criminals or simply consisted in putting to death innocent people , and , in the latter case , if it was done with consent or not . The testimony of the Romans is very vague and can not be accepted with entire confidence . But what we do know for certain is that the Romans themselves instituted in Gaul and everywhere else the putting to death of thousands of innocent people , not in order to do honour to the gods , but in order to amuse the crowds . That was a Roman institution par excellence , one they set up wherever they went ; and yet we dare to regard them as civilizers . Nevertheless , if one were to state publicly that pre-Roman Gaul was much more civilized than Rome , it would sound like an absurdity . That is simply a characteristic example . In spite of the fact that on the same soil which was that of Gaul a nation has arisen , which is our own ; that patriotism has with us , as elsewhere , a marked tendency to spread itself in the direction of the past ; that the few documents which have been preserved provide an irrefutable testimony , the military defeat of the Gauls is an unsurmountable obstacle to our recognizing the high spiritual qualities of this civilization which was destroyed . There have , all the same , been one or two attempts on the right lines , like that of Camille Jullian.7 But Trojan territory having never again served as the abode of a nation , who has ever gone to the trouble to discern the truth which blazes forth in the clearest possible fashion in the Iliad , in Herodotus and in the Agamemnon of Aeschylus—namely , that Troy possessed a level of civilization , culture and spiritual development far superior to that of those by whom it was unjustly attacked and destroyed , and that its disappearance was a disaster in the history of humanity ? Up to June 1940 , various articles appeared in the French press , by way of patriotic encouragement , comparing the Franco-German conflict to the Trojan war , and explaining how the latter was already then a struggle between civilization and barbarism , the barbarians being the Trojans . Now , there is nothing to account for this mistake save the fact that Troy was defeated . If one can not help falling into such a mistake in connexion with the Greeks , who were haunted by remorse for the crime committed and themselves bore witness in favour of their victims , how much more so in the case of other nations , whose invariable practice it is to vilify those whom they have exterminated ? History is founded upon documents . The professional historian won ’ t allow himself to form hypotheses which don ’ t rest upon something . That seems to be very reasonable ; but in reality it is far from being so . For , since there are holes in documents , a balanced judgment requires that hypotheses which haven ’ t any basis should be present to the mind , provided they be there in that capacity , and that there be several of them in connexion with each particular point . All the more reason why when dealing with documents it is necessary to read between the lines , allow oneself to be transported entirely , with a complete forgetfulness of self , into the atmosphere of the events recalled , keep the attention fixed for a very long time on any little significant details and discover exactly what their full meaning is . But the respect for documents and the professional spirit of historians do not incline their minds towards this type of exercise . What is called the historical spirit doesn ’ t pierce through the paper to discover real flesh and blood ; it consists in a subordination of the mind to documents . Now , according to the nature of things , documents originate among the powerful ones , the conquerors . History , therefore , is nothing but a compilation of the depositions made by assassins with respect to their victims and themselves . What is called the tribunal of History , seeing that its information is derived in this fashion , can not possibly judge in any other way than the one followed in the fable of ‘ The animals smitten with the plague ’ . On the subject of the Romans , we have absolutely nothing except what the Romans themselves wrote and what was written by their Greek slaves . The latter , poor devils , amidst their servile reticences , have said quite enough about them , if only we took the trouble to read really attentively what they have to say . But why should we take that trouble ? There is nothing to induce us to make the effort . It isn ’ t the Carthaginians who allot the prizes of the Academy8 or the professorships at the Sorbonne . Why , for the same reason , should we bother to cast doubts upon the information supplied by the Hebrews concerning the inhabitants of Canaan whom they either exterminated or enslaved ? It isn ’ t the people of Jericho who control nominations to the Institut Catholique.9 We know from one of Hitler ’ s biographies that one of the books which exercised a profound influence on him in his youth was a tenth-rate work on Sulla . The fact that it was tenth-rate is neither here nor there . What matters is that it reflected the attitude of what is known as the élite . Who would be found to write contemptuously about Sulla ? If Hitler desired the sort of greatness which he saw glorified in this book and everywhere else , he certainly made no mistake about it . For that is exactly the sort of greatness he has achieved , the very sort before which we all bow down in servile admiration as soon as our eyes are turned towards the past . We don ’ t go beyond a base submission of the mind in regard to it ; we haven ’ t tried , like Hitler , to seize it with both hands . But in this respect he is a better man than any of us . Once one recognizes something as being a good , one should want to seize it . Not to want to do so is cowardly . Let us just imagine for a moment that wretched , uprooted youth wandering about in the streets of Vienna , athirst for greatness . It well became him to be athirst for greatness . Was it his fault if he was unable to perceive any form of greatness except the criminal form ? Ever since the common people have become literate and no longer possess oral traditions , it is those capable of wielding a pen who have supplied the public with conceptions of greatness and with examples serving to illustrate them . The author of this mediocre book on Sulla , all those who in writing about Sulla or about Rome had made possible the atmosphere in which this book was written , and , more generally , all those who , being in a position to voice their thoughts in speech or writing , contributed towards the intellectual and spiritual atmosphere in which the youthful Hitler grew up—all those people are perhaps more guilty of Hitler ’ s crimes than he is himself . Most of them are now dead ; but those of today are no better than their elders and can not be rendered more innocent by the purely accidental date of birth . People talk about punishing Hitler . But he can not be punished . He desired one thing alone , and he has it : to play a part in History . He can be killed , tortured , imprisoned , humiliated , History will always be there to shield his spirit from all the ravages of suffering and death . What we inflict on him will be , inevitably , an historical death , an historical suffering—in fact , History . Just in the same way as for any one who has reached the perfect love of God , whatever happens is good as coming from God ; so for this idolizer of History , everything connected with History must be good . Moreover , he has a very considerable advantage ; for the pure love of God inhabits the centre of the soul , leaves the sensibility exposed to injury , doesn ’ t form an armour . Idolatry is an armour , prevents pain from entering the soul . Whatever Hitler is made to suffer , that will not stop him from feeling himself to be a superb figure . Above all , it will not stop , in twenty , fifty , a hundred or two hundred years ’ time , some solitary little dreamer , whether German or otherwise , from seeing in Hitler a superb figure , with a superb destiny from beginning to end , and desiring with all his soul to have a similar destiny . In which case , woe betide his contemporaries . The only punishment capable of punishing Hitler , and deterring little boys thirsting for greatness in coming centuries from following his example , is such a total transformation of the meaning attached to greatness that he should thereby be excluded from it . It is chimerical and due to the blindness induced by national hatred to imagine that one can exclude Hitler from the title to greatness without a total transformation , among the men of today , of the idea and significance of greatness . And in order to be able to contribute towards such a transformation , one must have accomplished it in oneself . Each of us can at this very moment commence Hitler ’ s punishment inside his own mind , by modifying the scope of the sentiment attaching to greatness . This is far from being an easy matter , for a social pressure as heavy and enveloping as the surrounding atmosphere stands opposed thereto . So as to be able to carry it out , one has to exclude oneself spiritually from the rest of society . Which is why Plato said that the ability to discern the good only exists in predestined souls that have been directly trained by God . It is nonsense to try to make out how far Hitler and Napoleon may be said to resemble and differ from each other . The only problem of any interest is to know whether you can legitimately exclude one from greatness without at the same time excluding the other ; whether their titles to admiration are similar or essentially different . And if , after having clearly posed the question and looked at it squarely in the face for some time , you allow yourself to slip into untruthfulness , you are lost . Marcus Aurelius said , using more or less these words , with reference to Alexander and Caesar : if they were not just , nothing forces me to imitate them . Similarly , nothing forces us to admire them . Nothing forces us to do this , except the sovereign influence of force . Can one possibly admire without loving ? And if admiration is a form of love , how can one bring oneself to love anything other than the good ? It would not be difficult to make a pact with oneself to admire in history only those actions and lives through which shines the spirit of truth , justice and love ; and , at a much lower level , those in which it is possible to discern a genuine foretaste of this spirit at work . That would exclude , for example , St. Louis himself , on account of the regrettable advice he gave his friends to plunge their swords into the belly of any one who in their presence should air opinions tainted with heresy or incredulity . People will , of course , say in his defence that it was the spirit of the times , which , being situated seven centuries before our own day , were proportionately unenlightened . It ’ s a lie . Shortly before St. Louis ’ day , the Catholics of Béziers , far from plunging their swords into the bodies of the heretics in their town , all suffered death rather than consent to hand them over . The Church has forgotten to place them in the ranks of her martyrs , a distinction which she accords to inquisitors put to death by their potential victims . Nor have lovers of tolerance , enlightenment and laicization , during the past three centuries , done anything to commemorate this event either ; so heroic a form of the virtue they label so insipidly tolerance they would have found disconcerting . But even if it were true , even if fanatical cruelty had dominated the minds of all in the Middle Ages , the sole conclusion to be drawn therefrom would be that there was nothing to love or admire in that epoch . It would not place St. Louis so much as a millimetre closer to righteousness . The spirit of truth , justice and love has nothing whatever to do with questions of date ; it is eternal ; evil constitutes the distance which separates actions and thoughts from it ; an act of cruelty in the tenth century is exactly as cruel , neither more nor less so , than an act of cruelty in the nineteenth . In identifying an act of cruelty , it is necessary to bear in mind the circumstances , the different meanings attached to acts and words , the symbolic language peculiar to each environment ; but once an act has been indubitably recognized as being cruel , it is a horrible one , whenever and wherever it happens to have been committed . We should feel it irresistibly if we loved as ourselves all the unfortunate beings who two or three thousand years ago suffered cruelties at the hands of their fellow-men . We wouldn ’ t then be able to write , as does M. Carcopino , that slavery had become mild in Rome under the Empire , seeing that it was rarely accompanied by any harsher punishment than beating with a rod . The modern superstition in regard to progress is a byproduct of the lie thanks to which Christianity became turned into the official Roman religion ; it is bound up with the destruction of the spiritual treasures of those countries which were conquered by Rome , with the concealment of the perfect continuity existing between these treasures and Christianity , with an historical conception concerning the Redemption , making of the latter a temporal operation instead of an eternal one . Subsequently , the idea of progress became laicized ; it is now the bane of our times . In laying down that inhuman acts in the fourteenth century were great and good things , but horrible things in the nineteenth century , how could a little chap of the twentieth century , fond of reading history , be prevented from saying to himself : ‘ I feel certain that the time when humanity was a virtue is now over and that we are returning to an age of inhumanity ? ’ What is there to prevent one imagining a cyclical succession instead of an uninterrupted straight line ? The dogma of progress brings dishonour upon goodness by turning it into a question of fashion . It is , moreover , solely because the historical mind consists in accepting the word of murderers unquestioningly that this dogma seems to correspond so admirably to the facts . When from time to time a shaft of horror manages to pierce the opaque insensibility of a reader of Livy , he says to himself : ‘ Those were the customs of the time ’ . The writings of Greek historians leave one , nevertheless , with the clearest impression that the brutality of the Romans horrified and paralysed their contemporaries in exactly the same way as that of the Germans does today . If I am not mistaken , amidst all the facts concerning the Romans which we find in ancient history , there is only one example of a perfectly pure act of goodness . Under the triumvirate , at the time of the proscriptions , the consular personages , consults , praetors whose names were on the list embraced the knees of their own slaves , imploring their help and calling them their masters and saviours ; for Roman pride wasn ’ t made to resist misfortune . The slaves , rightly enough , spurned these advances . There were very few exceptions in this matter . But a certain Roman , without having had to degrade himself , was hidden in his own house by his slaves . Some soldiers , who had seen him entering it , put these slaves to the torture to compel them to give up their master . The slaves submitted to it all without giving way . But the master , from his hiding-place , could see their tortures , and , unable to put up with the sight of them , came out and handed himself over to the soldiers and was immediately put to death . Whoever has his heart in the right place , if he had to choose between several different destinies , would choose to be either this master or one of these slaves , rather than one of the Scipios , a Caesar , a Cicero , an Augustus , a Virgil or even one of the Gracchi . Here is an example of what it is legitimate to admire . In history , there are few perfectly pure things . Most of them concern persons whose names have not been recorded , like this Roman , like those inhabitants of Béziers at the beginning of the thirteenth century . If one were to look for names which are associated with real purity , one would find very few . In Greek history , one would only be able to name Aristides , Dio , Plato ’ s friend , and Agis , the little socialist king of Sparta , put to death at the age of twenty . In French history , would one be able to find any other name besides that of Joan of Arc ? It is doubtful . But that is not the point . Are we obliged to admire many things ? The essential thing is to admire what one can find to admire with one ’ s whole soul . Who can admire Alexander with his whole soul whose soul is not base ? There are people who suggest that the teaching of history should be suppressed . It is true we ought to suppress the absurd custom of learning history lessons , apart from a bare minimum summary of dates and landmarks , and apply to history the same species of attention we give to literature . But as for suppressing the study of history , that would be disastrous . Without history there can be no sense of patriotism . We have only to look at the United States to see what it is to have a people deprived of the time-dimension . Others suggest teaching history by placing wars in the background . That would be lying . We know only too well today , and it is equally true of the past , that no subject is more important from the point of view of the peoples than that of war . We must talk about war just as much as , if not more than , we do at present ; but in a different way . No other method exists for acquiring knowledge about the human heart than the study of history coupled with experience of life , in such a way that the two throw light upon each other . It is our duty to supply this food to the mind of youth , the mind of Man . But it must be a truth-giving food . Facts must not only be correct , so far as one is able to verify them , but must be shown in their true perspective relatively to good and evil . History is a tissue of base and cruel acts in the midst of which a few drops of purity sparkle at long intervals . If such is the case , it is first of all because there is very little purity amongst men ; and secondly because the greater part of what little there is remains hidden . One must try and seek out if possible indirect testimony of its existence . The Romanesque churches , the Gregorian chant can only have arisen amongst peoples in whom much more purity was to be found than there has been in succeeding centuries . In order to love France , we must feel that she has a past ; but we must not love the historical wrapper of that past . We must love the part which is inarticulate , anonymous , which has vanished . It is absolutely false to imagine that there is some providential mechanism by which what is best in any given period is transmitted to the memory of posterity . By the very nature of things , it is false greatness which is transmitted . There is , indeed , a providential mechanism , but it only works in such a way as to mix a little genuine greatness with a lot of spurious greatness ; leaving us to pick out which is which . Without it we should be lost . The transmission of spurious greatness down the centuries is not peculiar to history . It is a general law , and governs equally well , for example , literature and the other arts . There is a certain domination of literary talent over the centuries which corresponds to the domination of political talent in space ; they are forms of domination of a like kind , equally temporal , equally attached to the realm of matter and force , equally base . They can , furthermore , form the subject of sale or exchange in open market . Ariosto didn ’ t blush to say to his patron , the Duke of Este , in the course of his poem , what more or less amounts to this : I am in your power during the course of my life , and you can decide whether I am to be rich or poor . But in my power lies your future good name , and I can decide whether , three hundred years hence , people will say good or evil of you , or nothing at all . It is in our mutual interest to come to an understanding . Give me your patronage and riches , and I will make you illustrious . Virgil had far too deep a sense of the proprieties to publicly place on record a commercial transaction of this nature . Nevertheless , this was , in fact , the transaction which took place between him and Augustus . His verse is often delightful to read ; but in spite of that , for him and others like him , another name should be found than that of poet . Poetry is not something for sale . God would be unjust if the Aeneid , which was composed under these conditions , were worth as much as the Iliad . But God is not unjust , and the Aeneid is very far indeed from being on an equality with the Iliad . It is not only in the study of history , it is in all forms of study put before children that the good is held up to contempt , and when they grow up , all they can find in the nourishment offered to their minds are motives for persisting in this contemptuous attitude . It is obvious—that is a truth which has long since become a platitude with children and men—that talent has nothing to do with morality . But in all spheres nothing but talent is held up to the admiration of children and men . In all manifestations of talent , whatever they may be , they see shamelessly flaunted before them the lack of all those virtues which it is recommended they should practise . What conclusion is to be drawn other than that virtue is in keeping with mediocrity ? So far has this conviction penetrated , that the very word virtue has now something ridiculous about it—that word which at one time held so much meaning , like the words honesty and goodness also . The British are closer to the past than people in other countries ; also there are no words today in the French language for translating ‘ good ’ and ‘ wicked ’ .10 How should a child who sees cruelty and ambition glorified in his history lessons ; egoism , pride , vanity , passion for selfadvertisement glorified in his literature lessons ; all the discoveries that have unsettled the lives of men glorified in his science lessons , without any account being taken of either the method of discovery or the effect of the unsettlement produced—how should he be expected to learn to admire the good ? Everything which tries to go against this universal current , for instance the homage paid to Pasteur , has a false ring about it . In an atmosphere of false greatness , it is useless to try to restore the true variety . False greatness must first be despised . It is true that talent has no connexion with morality ; but then , there is no greatness about talent . It is untrue that there is no connexion between perfect beauty , perfect truth , perfect justice : they are far more than just connected : they form a single mysterious unity , for the good is one . There exists a focal point of greatness where the genius creating beauty , the genius revealing truth , heroism and holiness are indistinguishable . Already , as one approaches this point , one can see the different forms of greatness tending to flow into one another . In Giotto , it is not possible to distinguish between the genius of the painter and the Franciscan spirit ; nor in the pictures and poems produced by the Zen sect in China between the painter ’ s or poet ’ s genius and the state of mystical ecstasy ; nor , when Velasquez places on the canvas his kings and beggars , between the painter ’ s genius and the burning and impartial love that pierces to the very depths of people ’ s souls . The Iliad , the tragedies of Aeschylus and those of Sophocles bear the clearest indication that the poets who produced them were in a state of holiness . From the purely poetic point of view , without taking into account anything else , it is infinitely preferable to have written the Canticle of St. Francis of Assisi , that jewel of perfect beauty , than the entire works of Victor Hugo . Racine wrote the only work11 in the whole of French literature which can almost be placed on a par with the great Greek masterpieces at a time when his spirit was racked by the problem of his conversion . He was far from being in a state of holiness when he wrote his other plays , but then , nor do we find in them the same heartrending beauty . A tragedy like King Lear is the direct fruit of the pure spirit of love . Holiness irradiates the Romanesque churches and the Gregorian chant . Monteverdi , Bach , Mozart were beings whose lives were pure even as were their works . If there are geniuses whose genius is pure to the extent of being manifestly very close to the greatness characteristic of the most perfect among the saints , why waste one ’ s time admiring others ? One can make use of others , derive instruction and pleasure from them ; but why love them ? Why give one ’ s heart to anything other than the good ? In French literature there is a discernible current of purity . In poetry , we must begin with Villon , the first , the greatest . We know nothing about his faults , nor even if there were any such on his part ; but his purity of soul is clearly manifest through the heart-breaking expression of misfortune . The last , or almost the last , is Racine , on account of Phèdre and the Cantiques spirituels . Between them one can name Maurice Scève , d ’ Aubigné , Théophile de Viau , who were three great poets and three human beings of a rare nobility . In the nineteenth century , all the poets were more or less men-of-letters , which shamefully pollutes poetry ; though Lamartine and Vigny at any rate really aspired after something pure and genuine . There is also a little true poetry in Gérard de Nerval . At the end of the century , Mallarmé was admired no less as a sort of saint than as a poet , and these two marks of greatness were , in fact , indistinguishable in him the one from the other . Mallarmé is a true poet . In prose , there is perhaps a mysterious purity in Rabelais , in whom , moreover , everything is mysterious . There is certainly some in Montaigne , in spite of his numerous failings , because there always dwelt within him a pure being , but for whom he would doubtless not have emerged from mediocrity , that is to say La Boétie . In the seventeenth century , one can think of Descartes , Retz , of Port-Royal , above all of Molière . In the eighteenth century , there are Montesquieu and Rousseau . That is perhaps all . On the supposition that the above list is fairly accurate , this doesn ’ t mean that we shouldn ’ t read what is left , but only that we shouldn ’ t read it expecting to find there the genius of France . The genius of France only resides in that which is pure . It is perfectly correct to say that it is a Christian and Hellenic genius . Which is why it would be right to accord a far smaller share in the education and culture of Frenchmen to things specifically French than to Romanesque art , the Gregorian chant , liturgical poetry , and to Greek art , poetry and prose of the best period . There one is able to drink in torrents of absolutely pure beauty from every point of view . It is unfortunate that Greek should be regarded as an erudite subject for specialists only . If we were to cease subordinating the study of Greek to that of Latin , and try to make a child capable of reading easily and with enjoyment an easy Greek text with the translation by the side of it , it would be possible to diffuse a slight knowledge of Greek to a very appreciable extent , even below the secondary school grade . Thus , every child of any ability at all would be able to enter into direct contact with the civilization whence we have derived our very notions of beauty , truth and justice . The love of the good will never spring up in the hearts of the population in general , as it is necessary it should do for the salvation of the country , so long as people believe that in no matter what sphere greatness can be the result of something other than the good . That is why Christ said : ‘ A good tree bringeth forth good fruit , but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit ’ . Either a perfectly beautiful work of art is an evil fruit , or the inspiration which produced it is akin to holiness . If pure good were never capable of producing on this earth true greatness in art , science , theoretical speculation , public enterprise , if in all these spheres there were only false greatness , if in all these spheres everything were despicable , and consequently condemnable , there would be no hope at all for the affairs of this world ; no possible illumination of this world by the other one . But it is not so ; which is why it is absolutely necessary to distinguish true from false greatness , and to set up the former only as an object of love . True greatness is the good fruit which grows on the good tree , and the good tree is a disposition of the soul akin to holiness . The other forms of so-called greatness have to be examined dispassionately , in the same way as one examines natural curiosities . If , in point of fact , this separation under two distinct headings can give rise to mistakes , it is none the less essential to let the principle of separation itself sink into the depths of the soul . The modern conception of science is responsible , as is that of history and that of art , for the monstrous conditions under which we live , and will , in its turn , have to be transformed , before we can hope to see the dawn of a better civilization . This is all the more vital in that , although science is strictly speaking a matter for specialists only , the prestige which science and savants have acquired over people ’ s minds is immense , and in non-totalitarian countries far and away surpasses any other kind . In France , at the outbreak of the war , it was perhaps the only form of prestige remaining ; nothing else was any longer accorded any respect . There was about the atmosphere of the Palais de la Découverte in 1937,12 at the same time a mixture of publicity and something almost religious , using the latter word in its most vulgar sense . Science , with its technical side which is but the application of it , constitutes our only claim to be proud of ourselves as Westerners , men of the white race , modern men . The missionary who persuades a Polynesian to give up his ancestral traditions , which are so poetic and so beautiful , concerning the creation of the world , in favour of those contained in Genesis , imbued with a very similar poetic feeling—that missionary derives his persuasive force from the consciousness he has of his superiority as a white man , a consciousness which is based on science . He is , nevertheless , as much a stranger to science as is the Polynesian ; for whoever isn ’ t a specialist remains absolutely a stranger to it . Genesis remains even more of a stranger to it . A village schoolteacher who makes fun of the curé , and whose attitude dissuades children from going to Mass , derives his persuasive force from the consciousness he possesses of his superiority as a modern individual over a dogma of the Middle Ages , which consciousness is based upon science . All the same , as far as possibilities for its verification go , Einstein ’ s theory is at least as little founded upon reason and as much opposed to common sense as is the Christian tradition concerning the conception and birth of Christ . In France , people question everything , respect nothing ; some show a contempt for religion , others for patriotism , the State , the administration of justice , property , art , in fact everything under the sun ; but their contempt stops short of science . The crudest scientism has no more fervent adepts than the anarchists . Le Dantec13 is their saint . Bonnot ’ s bandits tragiques14 took their inspiration from him , and the greatest hero among them , in the eyes of his comrades , was nicknamed ‘ Raymond la Science ’ . At the other extreme , one comes across priests and monks so absorbed by the religious life that they display a sovereign contempt for all secular values ; but their contempt stops short of science . In all the arguments in which religion and science appear to be in conflict , the Church displays an intellectual inferiority which is almost comic , for it is due , not to the force of the arguments adduced by the other side , usually of a very mediocre order , but solely to an inferiority complex . So far as the prestige of science is concerned , there are no such people nowadays as unbelievers . That places on savants , and also on philosophers and writers to the extent to which these write about science , a responsibility equal to that which the priests had in the thirteenth century . They are both , now as then , human beings whose material wants are attended to by society in order that they may have the leisure to explore , discover and communicate what is truth . In the twentieth century as in the thirteenth , the bread spent on this purpose is no doubt , unfortunately , bread thrown away , or perhaps even worse than that . The Church in the thirteenth century had Christ ; but it also had the Inquisition . Science in the twentieth century has no Inquisition ; but neither has it Christ , nor anything equivalent to Christ . The responsibility which savants and all who write about science have assumed in these days is such a heavy one that they also , like the historians and even to a greater degree , are possibly guiltier of Hitler ’ s crimes than Hitler himself . This is what would appear from a passage in Mein Kampf : ‘ Man must never fall into the error of believing himself to be the lord and master of creation … He will then feel that in a world in which planets and suns follow circular trajectories , moons revolve round planets , and force reigns everywhere and supreme over weakness , which it either compels to serve it docilely or else crushes out of existence , Man can not be subject to special laws of his own ’ . These lines express in faultless fashion the only conclusion that can reasonably be drawn from the conception of the world contained in our science . Hitler ’ s entire life is nothing but the putting into practice of that conclusion . Who can reproach him for having put into practice what he thought he recognized to be the truth ? Those who , having in themselves the foundations of the same belief , haven ’ t embraced it consciously and haven ’ t translated it into acts , have only escaped being criminals thanks to the want of a certain sort of courage which he possesses . Once more , it is not the forlorn youth , the wretched vagabond , with the hungry soul , whom it is right to accuse , but those who fed him upon lies . And those who fed him upon lies were our elders , whom we resemble . In the catastrophe of our time , the executioners and their victims are , both together , before anything else , the involuntary bearers of a testimony against the appalling wretchedness in which we wallow . In order to have the right to punish the guilty , we ought first of all to purify ourselves of their crimes , which we harbour under all sorts of disguises in our own hearts . But if we manage to perform this operation , once it has been accomplished we shall no longer feel the least desire to punish , and if we consider ourselves obliged to do so , it will be as little as possible and with extreme sorrow . Hitler has clearly perceived the absurdity of the eighteenth century conception , still in favour today , and which already had its roots in Descartes . For the last two or three centuries , people have believed that force rules supreme over all natural phenomena , and at the same time that men can and should base their mutual relations upon justice , recognized as such through the application of reason . This is a flagrant absurdity . It is inconceivable that everything in the universe should be entirely subjected to the rule of force and that Man should be able to escape the effects of this , seeing that he is made of flesh and blood and that his mind wanders here and there at the mercy of sensory impressions . There is only one possible choice to be made . Either we must perceive at work in the universe , alongside force , a principle of a different kind , or else we must recognize force as being the unique and sovereign ruler over human relations also . In the first case , one places oneself in radical opposition to modern science as founded by Galileo , Descartes and several others , pursued throughout the eighteenth century , notably by Newton , then in the nineteenth , and now in the twentieth . In the second case , one places oneself in radical opposition to the humanism which arose at the time of the Renaissance , triumphed in 1789 , and which , in a considerably degenerated form , served as inspiration for the whole of the Third Republic . The philosophy which has inspired the laical spirit and political radicalism is founded at the same time on this science and on this humanism , which are , as can be seen , manifestly incompatible with each other . You can not , therefore , say that Hitler ’ s victory over France in 1940 was the victory of a lie over a truth . An incoherent lie was vanquished by a coherent lie . That is why , as their arms gave way , people ’ s spirits did likewise . During the course of the last few centuries , the contradiction between science and humanism has been felt confusedly , although the intellectual courage has always been lacking to look it squarely in the face . Attempts have been made to resolve it , without first bringing it into the light of day . Such intellectual dishonesty is always punished by a lapse into error . Utilitarianism was the fruit of one of these attempts . It rests upon the supposed existence of a wonderful little piece of mechanism thanks to which force , on entering into the sphere of human relations , becomes an automatic producer of justice . The economic liberalism of the nineteenth century middle-classes rests entirely upon the belief in such a mechanism ; the only proviso being that in order to possess this property of being an automatic producer of justice , force must take the form of money to the exclusion of all use either of arms or of political power . Marxism is nothing else than a belief in a mechanism of this sort . There , force is given the name of history ; it takes the form of the class struggle ; justice is relegated to some future time which has to be preceded by a sort of apocalyptic cataclysm . And Hitler , too , after his brief moment of intellectual courage and perspicacity , fell into believing in this little piece of mechanism . But what he needed was a brand-new model of a machine . He hasn ’ t , however , either the taste or the capacity for intellectual invention , apart from a few flashes of intuitive genius . So he borrowed the model for his machine from the people who obsessed him continually by the repulsion with which they inspired him . He simply selected as his machine the notion of a chosen race , a race destined to make everything bow before it , and then to establish among its slaves the type of justice suitable to the condition of slavery . With regard to all these conceptions , in appearance so diverse and at bottom so similar , there is only one drawback , which is the same for all : they are lies . Force is not a machine for automatically creating justice . It is a blind mechanism which produces indiscriminately and impartially just or unjust results , but , by all the laws of probability , nearly always unjust ones . Lapse of time makes no difference ; it doesn ’ t increase in the functioning of this mechanism the infinitesimal proportion of results which happen by chance to be in conformity with justice . Where force is absolutely sovereign , justice is absolutely unreal . Yet justice can not be that . We know it experimentally . It is real enough in the hearts of men . The structure of a human heart is just as much of a reality as any other in this universe , neither more nor less of a reality than the trajectory of a planet . It doesn ’ t lie within the power of any man absolutely to exclude all justice whatsoever from the ends which he assigns to his actions . The Nazis themselves have not been able to do this . If it were possible for men to do so , they would no doubt have managed it . ( Let this be remarked in parenthesis . Their conception of a just order which is to be the final outcome of their victories rests upon the conviction that , for all who are slaves by nature , servitude is the condition which is at the same time the happiest and the most just . Now , this is precisely the conviction Aristotle held , and which inspired his great argument in justification of slavery . St. Thomas Aquinas , although he didn ’ t approve of slavery , looked upon Aristotle as the greatest authority on all subjects of study accessible to human reason , amongst which is justice . Consequently , the existence in contemporary Christianity of a Thomistic current constitutes a bond of complicity—amongst many others , unfortunately—between the Nazis and their adversaries . For , even if we reject that particular notion of Aristotle ’ s , we are necessarily led in our ignorance to accept others which must have lain in him at the root of that one . A man who takes the trouble to draw up an apology for slavery can not be a lover of justice . The age in which he lived has nothing to do with it . To accept as authoritative the ideas of a man who doesn ’ t love justice constitutes an offence against justice , inevitably punished by a decrease in powers of discernment . If St. Thomas committed that offence , nothing obliges us to repeat it . ) If justice is inerasable from the heart of Man , it must have a reality in this world . It is science , then , which is mistaken . Not science , to be perfectly exact , but modern science . The Greeks possessed a science which is the foundation of our own . It comprised arithmetic , geometry , algebra in a form peculiar to them , astronomy , mechanics , physics and biology . The sum total of knowledge accumulated was naturally very much less . But by its scientific character , according to the full significance we attach to that term , and judged by what we hold to be valid standards , that science equalled and even surpassed our own . It was more exact , precise , rigorous . The use of demonstration and of the experimental method were alike perfectly conceived . If this is not generally recognized , it is solely because the subject itself is little known . It will occur to few people , unless urged on by some particular vocation , to plunge into the atmosphere of Greek science as into something real and vital . But those who have done so have had no difficulty in recognizing the truth . The generation of mathematicians now approaching the age of forty is aware that after a long dearth of the scientific spirit in the development of mathematics , a return to the exactitude indispensable for savants is in process of taking place by the use of methods almost identical with those practised by Greek geometricians . As for technical applications , if Greek science didn ’ t produce many , it isn ’ t because it was incapable of doing so , but because the Greek savants didn ’ t wish it . These men , obviously very much less advanced than we are , as is natural seeing that they lived twenty-five centuries ago , feared the effects of technical inventions which could be made use of by tyrants and conquerors . So , instead of delivering to the public the greatest possible number of technical discoveries and selling them to the highest bidder , they kept rigorously secret all the ones they happened to make for their own amusement ; and , apparently , themselves remained poor . However , Archimedes , on one occasion , put his technical knowledge to use in order to defend his country . He did it all by himself , without revealing the smallest secret to anybody . Even today , we still find the account given of the marvellous things he managed to accomplish very largely incomprehensible . But he succeeded so well that the Romans only entered into Syracuse thanks to an act of semi-treachery . This science , which was as scientific as our own , if not more so , had no trace of materialism about it . What is more , it was not a subject of profane study . The Greeks regarded it as a religious subject . The Romans killed Archimedes . Shortly afterwards they killed Greece , just as the Germans , had it not been for England , would have killed France . Greek science disappeared completely . In Roman civilization not a trace of it remained . If the memory of it was transmitted to the Middle Ages , this was by means of so-called Gnostic thought , in very closed circles of initiates . Even so , it seems clear that it was only a question of preservation , not of any creative continuation ; except perhaps as far as alchemy was concerned , about which so little is known . At all events , Greek science didn ’ t make any public reappearance until the beginning of the sixteenth century ( if I am not mistaken in the date ) in Italy and France . It very rapidly acquired an enormous prestige and penetrated into the whole life of Europe . Today , nearly all our thoughts , customs , reactions and ways of behaviour as Europeans bear the impress either of its spirit or of its material applications . This is true more particularly of the intellectuals , even if they don ’ t happen to be what are called ‘ scientific ’ men , and even truer still of the workmen , who spend all their lives in an artificial universe formed by the applications of science . However , as in certain fairy tales , this science which was awakened after lying dormant for nearly two millenniums was no longer the same . It had been changed . It was of another kind , absolutely incompatible with anything of a religious spirit . That is why religion is nowadays something we relegate to Sunday morning . The rest of the week is dominated by the spirit of science . Unbelievers , who give their entire week up to it , have a triumphant feeling of inward unity . But they are mistaken , for their moral attitude is no less in contradiction with science than is the religion of the others . Hitler has clearly perceived this . Moreover , he is making a lot of other people perceive it also , wherever the presence or threatened presence of the S.S. is felt , and even further afield . Today , it is only belonging unconditionally to some brown , red or other totalitarian system which is able to give , as it were , a solid illusion of inward unity . Which is why it constitutes such a strong temptation for so many distraught minds . Among Christians , the absolute incompatibility between the spirit of religion and that of science , to both of which they cling , leaves the soul in a permanent state of secret , unacknowledged uneasiness . In certain cases it is hardly felt at all ; in others to a greater or lesser extent , depending on the individual ; but it is , of course , practically never admitted . It prevents inward cohesion . It makes it impossible for the Christian spirit to permeate all their thoughts . By an indirect effect of its continual presence , the most fervent Christians express every hour of their lives judgments , opinions , which , unknown to them , are based on standards which go contrary to the spirit of Christianity . But the most disastrous consequence of this uneasiness is to make it impossible for the virtue of intellectual probity to be exercised to the fullest extent . The modern phenomenon of irreligion among the population can be explained almost entirely by the incompatibility between science and religion . It developed when the population of the towns began to be installed in an artificial world , the material expression of science . In Russia , the transformation was hastened by means of propaganda which , in order to uproot the faith , relied almost exclusively upon the spirit of science and technical progress . Everywhere , once the people in the towns had become irreligious , the country people , ever exposed to influence through their inferiority complex in regard to the towns , followed their example , though to a more limited extent . Due to the very fact of the people ’ s desertion of the Churches , religion was automatically transferred to the Right , became a middle-class affair , something for respectable people . For , in fact , an institutional religion is necessarily bound to rely upon those who go to church . It can not rely upon those who stay outside . It is true that some time before this desertion took place , the servile attitude of the clergy towards the temporal power caused them to commit some grave mistakes . But these could have been put right but for this desertion . If they were in part responsible for bringing about this desertion , that part was only a very small one . It is almost solely science which has emptied the churches . If a section of the bourgeoisie was less disturbed in its piety by science than was the working-class , that is because , in the first place , it was in a less permanent , less bodily contact with the applications of science . But it was above all because it hadn ’ t any religious faith . Whoever hasn ’ t any religious faith can not lose it . Save for a few rare exceptions , the practice of religion was amongst such people a matter of what was socially fitting . A scientific conception of the world doesn ’ t prevent one from observing what is socially fitting . Thus , Christianity is , in effect , apart from a few isolated centres of inspiration , something socially in accordance with the interests of those who exploit the people . It is then not surprising that it should play on the whole such a mediocre part at this time in the struggle against the modern form of evil . All the more so seeing that , even in places , in hearts where religious activity is sincere and intense , there lies all too often at their core a source of impurity owing to a lack of the spirit of truth . The fact of the existence of science gives Christians a bad conscience . Few of them dare be quite certain that if they started from scratch and examined every problem , leaving out all personal preference , in an absolutely impartial critical spirit , the Christian dogma would seem to them to be manifestly and totally the truth . This uncertainty might be expected to loosen their ties with religion ; but this doesn ’ t happen , and the reason why it doesn ’ t happen is because religious life supplies them with something of which they stand in need . They themselves feel more or less confusedly that it is a need which attaches them to religion . But need is not a legitimate bond between Man and God . As Plato remarks , a great distance separates the nature of necessity from that of good . God gives Himself to Man gratuitously and by way of addition ; but Man should not desire to receive . He should give himself utterly , unconditionally , and for the only reason that after having strayed from illusion to illusion in his uninterrupted search for the good , he is certain he has found the truth in turning himself to God . Dostoievsky uttered the most frightful blasphemy when he said : ‘ If Christ is not the truth , I prefer to remain outside the truth with Christ ’ . Christ said : ‘ I am the truth. ’ He also said that He was bread and wine ; but He added : ‘ I am the true bread , the true wine ’ , that is to say , the bread which is nothing but truth , the wine which is nothing but truth . They must first of all be desired as truth , only afterwards as food . It is clear that all these things must have been completely forgotten , since people have been able to take Bergson for a Christian—the man who thought he saw in the spiritual energy displayed by the mystics the perfect expression of that élan vital which he turned for himself into an idol . Whereas what is really marvellous , in the case of the mystics and the saints , is not that they have more life , a more intense life than that of other people , but that in them truth should have become life . In this world of ours life , the élan vital so dear to Bergson , is but a lie ; only death is true . For life constrains one to believe what one requires to believe in order to live ; this servitude has been raised to the rank of a doctrine under the name of Pragmatism , and Bergson ’ s philosophy is a form of Pragmatism . But those beings who have , in spite of flesh and blood , spiritually crossed a boundary equivalent to death , receive on the farther side another life , which is not primarily life , which is primarily truth ; truth which has become living ; as true as death and as living as life . A life , as Grimm ’ s fairy tales put it , as white as snow and as red as blood . It is that which is the breath of truth , the divine Spirit . Pascal had already been guilty of lack of probity in his search for God . Having had his mind formed by the practice of science , he didn ’ t dare hope that by allowing it full play it would find certitude in the Christian dogma . He didn ’ t dare run the risk either of having to do without Christianity . So he undertook an intellectual research having decided beforehand where it was to lead him . To avoid all possible risk of landing himself elsewhere , he allowed his mind to be dominated by a conscious and deliberately entertained suggestion . After which , he sought for proofs . In the sphere of probability , significant indication , he discovered some very weighty things . But as for proofs properly so called , he only advanced wretched enough ones ; the argument of the wager , the prophecies , the miracles . What is more serious for him is that he never did reach certitude . He never did receive the gift of faith , and that is because he had tried to take possession of it . Most of those who embrace Christianity , or else who , having been born into it and never having left it , remain sincerely and fervently attached to it , are attracted and afterwards held by a need of the heart . They would be unable to do without religion . At least they would be unable to do without it and at the same time avoid experiencing a sort of degradation . But for religious feeling to emanate from the spirit of truth , one should be absolutely prepared to abandon one ’ s religion , even if that should mean losing all motive for living , if it should turn out to be anything other than the truth . In this state of mind alone is it possible to discern whether there is truth in it or not . Otherwise , one doesn ’ t venture even to propound the problem in all its rigour . God ought not to be for a human heart a reason for living , like his treasure is for a miser . Harpagon and Grandet loved their treasure ; they would have allowed themselves to be killed for it ; they would have died of grief because of it ; they would have performed miracles of courage and energy on behalf of it . It is possible to love God in this way . But one ought not to do so . Or rather it is only to a certain part of the soul that such a love is permissible , because it can not understand any other kind ; but it should remain subject to , in the hands of , that other part of the soul which is worth more . One can say without fear of exaggeration that today the spirit of truth is almost absent from religious life . This is observable amongst other things in the nature of the arguments adduced in favour of Christianity . Many of them are of the publicity type associated with ‘ Pink ’ pills . It is the case with Bergson and all that draws its inspiration from him . In Bergson , religious faith appears after the manner of a ‘ Pink ’ pill of a superior kind , which imparts an astonishing amount of vitality . The same thing applies to the historical argument , which runs in this sort : ‘ Look what a miserable lot men were before Christ . Christ came , and see how men , in spite of their backslidings , afterwards became , on the whole , a good lot ! ’ That is absolutely contrary to the truth . But even if it were true , it reduces apologetics to the level of advertisements for pharmaceutical products , which describe the state of the patient before and after . It is measuring the effectiveness of Christ ’ s Passion , which , if it is not fictitious , is necessarily infinite , by an historical , temporal and human result which , even if it were real , which it isn ’ t , would necessarily be finite . Pragmatism has encroached upon and profaned the very conception of faith . If the spirit of truth is almost absent from religious life , it would be strange indeed if it were to be present in secular life . It would be the turning upside down of an eternal hierarchy . But such is not the case . The savants insist that the public should regard science with that religious respect which is owed to truth , and the public accepts to do so . But it is being deceived . Science is not a fruit of the spirit of truth , and this is obvious as soon as one looks into the matter . For the effort of scientific research , such as it has been understood since the sixteenth century , can not possess as its motive the love of truth . That rests on a criterion which is universal and sure in its application . It consists , in order to form an opinion about anything , to endeavour to discern the proportion of good contained , not in the thing itself , but in the motives for the effort which has produced it . For the amount of good in the thing itself is the same as the amount of good in the motive behind it , neither more nor less . Christ ’ s words on the subject of the trees and their fruits are a guarantee of this . God alone , it is true , can discern the motives hidden in people ’ s hearts . But the conception which governs any particular activity , and which is generally no secret , is compatible with certain motives and not with others ; there are some which it necessarily excludes , in the nature of things . It is a question , therefore , of an analysis leading to an evaluation of the product of any particular human activity by examining the motives compatible with the conception which governs it . From this analysis a method may be derived for making men—peoples and individuals , and oneself to begin with—better , by modifying the conceptions in such a way as to bring the purest motives into play . The conviction that every conception incompatible with really pure motives is itself tainted with error , is the first necessary article of faith . Faith is above all the conviction that the good is one . To believe that there are several distinct and mutually independent forms of good , like truth , beauty and morality—that is what constitutes the sin of polytheism , and not just simply allowing the imagination to play with the notions of Apollo and Diana . On applying this method to the analysis of science during the past three or four centuries , one is bound to recognize that the beautiful word truth stands infinitely above it . The savants , in the efforts they put forth day by day throughout the course of their lives , can not be urged on by the desire to possess truth . For what they acquire is simply knowledge , and knowledge is not in itself an object of desire . A little boy learns his geography lesson so as to have good marks , or in obedience to orders received , or to please his parents , or because he feels that far-off places and their names have a poetry about them . If none of these motives exists , he just doesn ’ t learn his lesson . Supposing at a given moment he doesn ’ t know the name of the capital of Brazil , and the next moment he learns what it is , he has acquired an additional item of knowledge . But he is no whit nearer to truth than he was before . There are certain cases in which the acquisition of knowledge causes one to approach truth , there are other cases in which it doesn ’ t . How to distinguish between the two sets of cases ? If a man surprises his wife whom he loves and in whom he has perfect confidence being flagrantly unfaithful to him , he is suddenly brought into brutal contact with a piece of truth . If he happens to hear that some woman whom he doesn ’ t know , whose name he hears mentioned for the first time , in a town which he doesn ’ t know either , has deceived her husband , that fact doesn ’ t alter his relationship to truth in the slightest . This latter example furnishes the key . The acquisition of knowledge causes us to approach truth when it is a question of knowledge about something we love , and not in any other case . Love of truth is not a correct form of expression . Truth is not an object of love . It is not an object at all . What one loves is something which exists , which one thinks on , and which may hence be an occasion for truth or error . A truth is always the truth with reference to something . Truth is the radiant manifestation of reality . Truth is not the object of love but reality . To desire truth is to desire direct contact with a piece of reality . To desire contact with a piece of reality is to love . We desire truth only in order to love in truth . We desire to know the truth about what we love . Instead of talking about love of truth , it would be better to talk about the spirit of truth in love . Pure and genuine love always desires above all to dwell wholly in the truth whatever it may be , unconditionally . Every other sort of love desires before anything else means of satisfaction , and for this reason is a source of error and falsehood . Pure and genuine love is in itself spirit of truth . It is the Holy Spirit . The Greek word which is translated spirit means literally fiery breath , breath mingled with fire , and it represented , in antiquity , the notion which science represents today by the word energy . What we translate by ‘ spirit of truth ’ signifies the energy of truth , truth as an active force . Pure love is this active force , the love which will not at any price , under any condition , have anything to do with either falsehood or error . For such a love as this to be able to be the motive of the savant in his exhausting task of research , he would have to have something to love . It would be necessary for the conception which he forms of the object of his studies to contain an aspect of the Good . But just the opposite is the case . Since the Renaissance—or to be more exact , since the second half of the Renaissance—the very conception of science has been that of a branch of study whose object is placed beyond good and evil , especially beyond good ; viewed without any relation either to good or evil , but especially without any relation to good . Science only studies the facts as such , and the mathematicians themselves regard mathematical relations simply as facts of the mind . Facts , force , matter , isolated , considered singly , without reference to anything else—there is nothing here that a human mind can love . It follows that the acquisition of fresh knowledge is not a sufficient stimulant to encourage savants in their efforts . Other stimulants are needed . To start with , they have the stimulant which is found in hunting , sport , games . One often hears mathematicians comparing their speciality to a game of chess . Some of them compare it to activities in which flair , psychological intuition is necessary , because they say they have to guess in advance which mathematical concepts will prove to be , if adopted , sterile or fruitful . That is certainly playing a game , and almost a game of chance . Very few savants penetrate sufficiently deeply into science for their hearts to be stirred by beauty . There is a certain mathematician who readily compares mathematics to sculpture in a particularly hard stone . People who present themselves to the public as the highpriests of truth strangely degrade the rôle they have assumed by comparing themselves to chess players ; the comparison with a sculptor is at any rate more becoming . But if one ’ s vocation is to be a sculptor , it is better to be a sculptor than a mathematician . On closer examination , the latter comparison , according to the present conception of science , doesn ’ t make sense . It represents a very blurred anticipation of a different conception . Technical application plays such a large part in the prestige of science that one would be inclined to expect savants to derive a powerful stimulant from reflecting upon the different forms of application . In fact , what provides a stimulant is not that but the actual prestige such applications confer on science . Just as the idea of making history goes to the heads of the politicians , so the savants become intoxicated at feeling themselves to be taking part in something really great . Great in the sense of false greatness , certainly ; a greatness independent of any consideration for the good . At the same time , certain among them , those whose researches are above all theoretical , while tasting the pleasures of this intoxication , are proud to announce themselves to be indifferent to technical application . They thus enjoy two advantages which are really incompatible but are compatible in the realm of fancy , which is always a most agreeable situation in which to be . They are among the ones who direct men ’ s destiny , so their indifference towards this destiny promptly reduces mankind to the proportions of race of ants . It is a god-like state . They do not realize that , according to the present conception of science , if you take away its technical applications , nothing else is left which it is possible to look upon as a good . Skill at a game similar to chess is something of no value at all . Were it not for its technical applications , no member of the public today would take any interest in science ; and if the public didn ’ t take an interest in science , those who follow a scientific career would have had to choose another one . They have no right to take up the detached attitude which they do . But though it isn ’ t a legitimate attitude , it acts as a stimulant . For others , on the contrary , reflecting upon technical applications provides a stimulant . But all they are concerned about is their importance , not their good or evil effects . A savant who feels himself to be on the point of making a discovery which may quite well seriously upset human existence , will nevertheless strain every effort in order to carry his researches to a successful conclusion . It seems that it hardly ever , if ever , happens that he should stop to weigh up the probable effects of the upsetting change from the point of view of good and evil , and give up his researches if evil should seem the more likely to result . Such heroism would even appear to be out of the question ; and yet it ought to be an understood thing . But here , as elsewhere , it is false greatness which dominates , the kind represented by quantity and not by the good . Finally , savants are perpetually spurred on by social considerations which are so paltry as to make them almost too shameful to be acknowledged , and which do not play a large ostensible rôle , but are extremely powerful . Anyone who saw the French , in June 1940 , letting their country drop so easily , and then a few months later , before they had really been made to feel the pinch of hunger , performing miracles of endurance , defying fatigue and cold for hours , in order to procure themselves an egg , can not be unaware of what an incredible source of energy lies in paltry considerations . The primary social consideration for savants is purely and simply one of professional duty . Savants are people who are paid to manufacture science ; they are expected to manufacture some ; they feel it to be their duty to manufacture some . But that is insufficient for them as a stimulant . Professional advancement , professorships , rewards of all kinds , honours and money , receptions abroad , the esteem and admiration of colleagues , reputation , fame , titles—all that counts for a great deal . The habits of savants provide the best proof of this . In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries , savants used to fling challenges at one another . When they published their discoveries , they used purposely to omit various links in the chain of proof , or else they would upset the order of them , so as to prevent their colleagues from being able to understand exactly what it was all about ; in this way they protected themselves against the danger of some rival being able to claim to have previously made the same discovery . Descartes himself admits having done this in his Géométrie . Which proves that he was not a philosopher in the sense in which this word was understood by Pythagoras and Plato—a lover of divine Wisdom . Since Greece disappeared there hasn ’ t been such a thing as a philosopher . Nowadays , as soon as a savant has discovered anything , before even having allowed himself the time to test its value , he rushes off to send what is called a note au compte rendu15 in order to make quite sure of his prior claim . A case like that of Gauss is perhaps unique in our science . He would push manuscripts containing the most marvellous discoveries into the backs of drawers and forget about them ; then when somebody produced something altogether sensational , he would remark casually : ‘ All that is so , I discovered it fifteen years ago ; but one can go very much farther in this direction and propound this , that or the other theorem in addition ’ . But , of course , he was a genius of the first order . Perhaps there have , indeed , been a few like that , just a mere handful , in the course of the last three or four centuries . What science meant to them has remained their secret . Inferior motives have played a very great part in the daily efforts of all the rest . Today the ease of communications all over the world in peacetime and specialization carried to an extreme have made it so that savants of each speciality , who themselves constitute reciprocally their one and only public , form the equivalent of a village . Professional tittle-tattle goes the rounds unceasingly ; everybody knows everybody else , has a personal like or dislike for the other fellow . Different generations and nationalities run up against each other ; other people ’ s private affairs , politics , professional jealousies play an important part . It follows that the collective opinion of this village is bound to be vitiated ; it represents , notwithstanding , the sole species of control over the savant ; for neither laymen , nor savants belonging to other branches , take any interest in his researches . The force of social considerations causes the savant ’ s mind to be subservient to this collective opinion ; he endeavours to please it . Whatever it is prepared to admit in science , is admitted ; whatever it is not prepared to admit , is rejected . There is not a single disinterested judge amongst them , since each specialist , owing to the very fact that he is a specialist , is an interested party . It will be said that the fertility of a theory is an objective criterion . But this criterion is only valid in the case of such theories as are admitted . A theory which is rejected by the collective opinion of the village of savants is perforce sterile , because no attempt is then made to draw any results from it . This happens especially in the case of physics , where the actual means of research and control are a monopoly in the hands of a very closed circle . If people hadn ’ t taken such a great fancy to the quantum theory when it was first launched by Planck , and that in spite of the fact that it was absurd—or perhaps because it happened to be so , for everyone was tired of reason—nobody would ever have known that it was a fertile one . At the time it became so popular , there was absolutely no solid data for giving one any reason to suppose that it would be . Hence we find a Darwinian process operating in science . Theories spring up as it were at random , and there is survival of the fittest . Such a science as this can well be a form of élan vital , but certainly not a form of the search for truth . The general public itself can not be , nor is it , ignorant of the fact that science , like every other product of a collective opinion , is subject to fashion . The savants inform it at fairly frequent intervals that such-and-such theories are old-fashioned . We should regard this as a scandal , if we were not too brutish to be sensitive to any scandal at all . How can one possibly accord a religious respect to something subjected to fashion ? The Negro fetishists are very superior to us ; they are infinitely less idolatrous than we . They have a religious respect for a piece of carved wood which is beautiful , and to which beauty imparts an eternal significance . We are really and truly suffering from the disease of idolatry , and it is so deeply rooted that it takes away from Christians the power to bear witness to the truth . No deaf men ’ s dialogue could possibly equal in comical force the polemic between the modern spirit and the Church . The unbelievers select , in the name of the scientific spirit , and to use them as arguments against the Christian faith , truths which constitute indirectly , or even directly , manifest proofs of that faith . The Christians never notice this , and make feeble attempts , with a bad conscience and a distressing lack of intellectual honesty , to deny such truths . Their blindness is their punishment for the crime of idolatry . No less comical is the embarrassment of the worshippers of the idol when they seek to express their enthusiasm . They look for something to praise and can not find anything . It is easy enough to praise scientific applications ; only scientific applications are something technical , they are not science . What is there to praise in science itself ? And more precisely , seeing that science is incarnate in men , what is there to praise in the savants ? It is not very easy to perceive . When people want to hold up a savant to the admiration of the public , they always choose Pasteur , at any rate in France . He serves as a cloak to the idolatry of science just as Joan of Arc does to nationalist idolatry . He is chosen because he did a great deal to relieve the physical ills of mankind . But if his intention to succeed in doing this was not the primary motive of his efforts , the fact that he did succeed in doing it must be regarded as a mere coincidence . If that actually was the primary motive , the admiration owed to him has nothing to do with the greatness of science ; it is a question of a practical virtue ; and in that case , Pasteur would need to be placed in the same category as a hospital nurse devoted to the point of heroism , and would only differ from her in the range of the results achieved . Since the spirit of truth is absent from the motives behind science , it can not be present in science . If one were to expect to find it , on the other hand , to any considerable extent in philosophy and literature , one would be disappointed . Are there many books or articles which leave us with the impression that the author , first before ever beginning to write , and then again before handing the manuscript to the printer , asked himself with any real concern : ‘ Am I in line with truth ? ’ Are there many readers who , before opening a book , ask themselves with any real concern : ‘ Am I going to find truth in here ? ’ If all those whose profession it is to think—priests , pastors , philosophers , writers , savants , teachers of all kinds—were offered the choice , at this very instant , between two destinies : either to sink immediately and irrevocably into a state of idiocy , in the literal sense of the word , with all the humiliations attendant on such a collapse , and retaining only just sufficient lucidity to be able to feel the full bitterness of their plight ; or else a sudden and prodigious development of the intellectual faculties , such as to guarantee them immediate world-wide fame and after their death glory for thousands of years to come , but with this drawback , that their thought would always remain a little bit out of line with truth—is it possible to suppose that there would be many who in regard to such a choice would experience even a momentary hesitation ? The spirit of truth is nowadays almost absent from religion and from science and from the whole of thought . The appalling evils in the midst of which we struggle , without even managing to understand quite how tragic they are , are due entirely to that . ‘ Cet esprit de mensonge et d ’ erreur—De la chute des rois funeste avant-coureur ’ ,16 which Racine spoke about , is today no longer the monopoly of sovereigns . It embraces all classes of the population ; it takes possession of whole nations and drives them into a frenzy . The remedy is to bring back again among us the spirit of truth , and to start with in religion and science ; which implies that the two of them should become reconciled . The spirit of truth can dwell in science on condition that the motive prompting the savant is the love of the object which forms the stuff of his investigations . That object is the universe in which we live . What can we find to love about it , if it isn ’ t its beauty ? The true definition of science is this : the study of the beauty of the world . As soon as one thinks about it , it becomes obvious . Matter , blind force are not the object of science . Thought is incapable of reaching out to them ; they fly ahead of it . The savant ’ s thought is never able to reach beyond relations in which matter and force are knit into an invisible , impalpable and unalterable pattern of order and harmony . ‘ Heaven ’ s net is vast ’ , says Lao-Tse ; ‘ its meshes are wide ; yet nothing gets through. ’ How should human thought ever have any other object but thought ? That is so well-known a difficulty in the theory of knowledge that one gives up trying to fathom it , leaving it on one side as an accepted fact . But there is an answer . It is that the object of human thought is itself thought . The savant ’ s true aim is the union of his own mind with the mysterious wisdom eternally inscribed in the universe . That being so , how should there be any opposition or even separation between the spirit of science and that of religion ? Scientific investigation is simply a form of religious contemplation . This was certainly the case in Greece . What , then , has happened since ? How is it that this science , which when it was cut down by the Roman sword was essentially religious in spirit , should have woken up materialistic after coming out of its long lethargy ? What had happened in the interval ? A transformation had taken place in religion . I do not refer to the advent of Christianity . Early Christianity , as we can still find it in the New Testament , and particularly in the Gospels , was , like the Mystery religions of antiquity , perfectly capable of becoming the central inspiration behind a strictly genuine science . But Christianity suffered a transformation , probably connected with its transition to the rank of the official Roman religion . After this transformation , Christian thought , except in the case of a very few mystics , always exposed to the danger of being condemned , no longer admitted any other conception of divine Providence than that of a personal Providence . This conception is found in the Gospels , for God is there referred to as the Father . But the conception of an impersonal Providence , and one in a sense almost analogous to a mechanism , is also to be found there . ‘ That ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven ; for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good , and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust … Be ye therefore perfect , even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect ’ ( Matt . v , 45 , 48 ) . Thus it is that blind impartiality characteristic of inert matter , it is that relentless regularity characterizing the order of the world , completely indifferent to men ’ s individual quality , and because of this so frequently accused of injustice—it is that which is held up as a model of perfection to the human soul . It is a conception of so profound a significance that we are not even today capable of grasping it ; contemporary Christianity has completely lost touch with it . All the parables about the seed are connected with this notion of an impersonal Providence . Grace descends from God upon all beings ; what becomes of it depends on what they are ; there where it really penetrates , the fruit it bears is the result of a process similar to a mechanical one , and which , like a mechanical one , takes place in a time continuum . The virtue of patience , or to translate the Greek word more accurately , of immobile expectancy , is relative to this necessity of duration . The non-intervention of God in the operation of grace is expressed as clearly as it possibly can be : ‘ So is the kingdom of God , as if a man should cast seed into the ground ; and should sleep , and rise night and day , and the seed should spring and grow up , he knoweth not how . For the earth bringeth forth fruit of herself ; first the blade , then the ear , after that the full corn in the ear ’ ( Mark iv , 26–28 ) . Everything which has to do with asking is suggestive also of something similar to a piece of mechanism . All real desire for pure good , after a certain degree of intensity has been reached , causes the good in question to descend . If this result is not attained , either the desire is not real , or it is too weak , or the good desired is imperfect , or it is mixed with evil . When the conditions have been fulfilled , God never refuses . Like the germination of grace , it is a process that takes place in a time continuum . Which is why Christ commands us to be importunate . The similes which he uses in this connexion are also suggestive of a mechanism . It is a psychological mechanism which compels the judge to give satisfaction to the widow : ‘ Yet because this widow troubleth me , I will avenge her , lest by her continual coming she weary me ’ ( Luke xviii , 5 ) , and the man who has gone to bed to open the door to his friend : ‘ Though he will not rise and give him , because he is his friend , yet because of his importunity he will rise and give him … ’ ( Luke xi , 8 ) . If we exercise a sort of compulsion upon God , it can only be a question of a mechanism instituted by God . Supernatural mechanisms are at least as dependable as are the laws of gravity ; but natural mechanisms are the conditions necessary for producing events as such , without regard being had for any consideration of value ; whereas supernatural mechanisms are the conditions necessary for producing pure good as such . This is what is confirmed by the practical experience of the saints . They have observed , so it is said , that they could sometimes , by force of desire , cause more good to descend upon a soul than the latter really desired of its own accord . This shows that good descends from heaven upon earth only to the extent to which certain conditions are in fact fulfilled on earth . The entire works of St. John of the Cross are nothing else but a strictly scientific study of supernatural mechanisms . Plato ’ s philosophy also is nothing else than that . Even the judgment appears , in the Gospels , as something impersonal : ‘ He that believeth on him is not condemned : but he that believeth not is condemned already . … And this is the condemnation … every one that doeth evil hateth the light ; … but he that doeth truth cometh to the light ’ ( John iii , 18–21 ) ; ‘ As I hear , I judge , and my judgment is just ’ ( John v , 30 ) ; ‘ If any man hear my words , and believe not , I judge him not : for I came not to judge the world , but to save the world . He that rejecteth me , and receiveth not my words , hath one that judgeth him : the word that I have spoken , the same shall judge him in the last day ’ ( John xii , 47–48 ) . In the story of the labourers of the eleventh hour , there seems to be caprice on the part of the owner of the vineyard . But a closer examination shows the opposite to be the case . He pays only one type of wage because he possesses only one type of wage . He hasn ’ t any change . St. Paul defined the wage thus : ‘ I shall know even as I am known ’ . That doesn ’ t admit of degrees . Similarly , there are no degrees in connexion with the act which gives the right to receive the wage . One is called ; one either comes running up , or one doesn ’ t . No one is able to anticipate the call , even by so much as a second . The actual moment is of no importance ; nor is the amount of work or the quality of the work performed in the vineyard . One enters or one doesn ’ t enter into eternity , as the case may be , according to whether one has consented or refused . ‘ Whosoever exalteth himself shall be abased ; and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted ’ ( Luke xiv , II ) : that conjures up a balance , as though the earthly part of the soul were in one of the scales , and the divine part in the other . There is a Good Friday hymn also comparing the Cross to a balance : ‘ … Ceuxlà ont reçu leur récompense ’ . God has , therefore , only the power to reward those efforts that can not be rewarded in this world , those efforts carried out in the void ; the void attracts grace . Efforts carried out in the void constitute the operation which Christ calls ‘ laying up treasures in heaven ’ . One could find in the Gospels , in spite of the fact that they have transmitted to us but a small portion of Christ ’ s teachings , what one might call a supernatural physics of the human soul . Like all scientific doctrine , this science only contains things which are clearly intelligible and experimentally verifiable . However , here verification takes the form of the march towards perfection , and consequently one has to accept the word of those who have accomplished it . But we readily accept the word of the savants , without the least check , concerning what takes place in their laboratories , although we don ’ t know at all whether they love truth . It would be more reasonable to accept the word of the saints , at least of all the genuine ones , for it is certain they have a whole-hearted love of truth . The problem of miracles only causes difficulty between religion and science because it is badly presented . To present it properly , it is necessary to give a definition of a miracle . To say that it is a fact contrary to the laws of nature is to say something completely devoid of significance . We do not know what the laws of nature are . We can only make suppositions in regard to them . If the laws we suppose are contradicted by facts , it shows that our supposition was at any rate in part erroneous . To say that a miracle is the effect of a particular act of volition on the part of God is no less absurd . Amidst all the events which take place , we have no right to maintain that certain of them rather than others are the result of God ’ s will . All we know , in a general way , is that everything which happens , without any exception , is in accordance with the will of God considered as Creator ; and that everything which contains at any rate a particle of pure good proceeds from the supernatural inspiration of God considered as Absolute Good . But when a saint performs a miracle , what is good is the saintliness , not the miracle . A miracle is a physical phenomenon necessitating as one of its prerequisites a total abandonment of the soul either to good or to evil . One has to say either to good or to evil , for there are diabolical miracles : ‘ For false Christs and false prophets shall arise , and shall show signs and wonders , to seduce , if it were possible , even the elect ’ ( Mark xiii , 22 ) ; ‘ Many will say to me in that day : Lord , Lord , have we not prophesied in thy name , and in thy name have cast out devils , and in thy name done many wonderful works ? And then I will profess unto them : I never knew you ; depart from me , ye that work iniquity ’ ( Matt . vii , 22–23 ) . It is in no way contrary to the laws of nature that a total abandonment of the soul to either good or evil should be accompanied by physical phenomena which are only produced in such a case . It would be contrary to the laws of nature if it were otherwise . For every attitude of the human soul is accompanied by a certain particular physical state . Sorrow is accompanied by salt water in the eyes ; then why not in certain states of mystical ecstasy , as is averred , a certain lifting up of the body above the ground ? The fact may be true or not ; it doesn ’ t much matter . What is certain is that if the mystical ecstasy corresponds to something real in the soul , it must be accompanied in the body by phenomena which are not observable when the soul is in a different state . The connexion between mystical ecstasy and these phenomena is formed by a mechanism similar to that which connects sorrow with tears . We know nothing about the first mechanism . But we don ’ t know any more about the second one . The unique supernatural fact in this world is holiness itself and what lies near to it ; it is the fact that the divine commandments should become for those who love God a motive , an active force , motor energy in the literal sense , like petrol in a motor-car . If three steps are taken without any other motive than the desire to obey God , those three steps are miraculous ; they are equally so whether they take place on dry land or on water . Only that if they take place on dry land nothing extraordinary appears . It is said that stories about walking upon water and the resurrection of the dead are so common in India that nobody , except out of vulgar curiosity , would go out of his way to see any performances of that kind . It is certain at any rate that accounts of such matters are very widespread there . They were also very widespread in Greece in its decline , as may be seen in Lucian . This singularly diminishes the apologetical value of miracles for Christianity . A Hindu anecdote relates how an ascetic , after fourteen years spent in solitude , returned to see his family . His brother asked him what he had acquired in that time . So he led his brother down to a river and crossed it on foot before his very eyes . The brother hailed a ferryman , crossed by boat , handed over a penny , and said to the ascetic : ‘ Is it worth while spending fourteen years ’ efforts in order to acquire what I can obtain by the payment of a penny ? ’ It is the attitude of common sense . As far as the exactitude of the extraordinary acts related in the Gospels is concerned , all affirmations or denials on the subject can only be the result of guesswork , and the problem itself is without interest . It is certain that Christ possessed certain special powers ; why should we doubt it , seeing that we are able to verify that Hindu and Tibetan saints possess them ? To know the precise degree of exactitude of each particular event would not be of any use to us . The powers exercised by Christ constituted , not a proof , but a link in the chain of a demonstration . They were the certain sign that Christ was placed outside the ordinary run of humanity , amongst those who have given themselves either to evil or to good . They didn ’ t indicate which . But it was easy to see which it was by the manifest perfection of Christ , the purity of his life , the perfect beauty of his words , and the fact that he only exercised his powers in order to perform acts of compassion . All this was merely the proof that he was a saint . But those who were certain he was a saint , when they listened to him declaring himself to be the Son of God , might hesitate as to the precise meaning of these words , but were bound to believe that they contained a truth . For when a saint says such things , he can not either be lying or be mistaken . We , in the same way , are bound to believe all that Christ has said , save where we have the right to suppose a faulty transcription ; and what gives the proof its force is beauty . When the subject in question is the good , beauty is a rigorous and positive proof ; and , indeed , there can be none other . It is absolutely impossible for there to be any other . Christ said : ‘ If I had not done among them the works which none other man did , they had not had sin ’ ; but he also said : ‘ If I had not come and spoken unto them , they had not had sin ’ .17 Elsewhere he speaks about his ‘ mighty works ’ .18 Acts and words are classed together . The exceptional character of the acts had no other object than to draw attention . Once the attention has been drawn , there can be no other form of proof than beauty , purity , perfection . The words addressed to Thomas , ‘ Blessed are they that have not seen , and yet have believed ’ ,19 can not refer to those who , without having seen it , believe in the fact of the resurrection . That would be praising credulity , not faith . There are old women everywhere who are only too ready to believe no matter what tale about dead people returned to life . Surely those who are called blessed are they who have no need of the resurrection in order to believe , and for whom Christ ’ s perfection and the Cross are in themselves proof . Thus from the religious point of view the miracles are of secondary importance , and from the scientific point of view they enter naturally into the scientific conception of the world . As for the idea of proving God ’ s existence by a violation of the laws of nature , it would doubtless have appeared to the early Christians as monstrous . It could only arise in our diseased minds , which think that the fixed order of the world is able to offer legitimate arguments to atheists . The succession of events in the world also appears in the Gospels as though it were regulated by a Providence that is , in one sense at any rate , impersonal and comparable to a piece of mechanism . Christ said to his disciples : ‘ Behold the fowls of the air ; for they sow not , neither do they reap , nor gather into barns ; yet your heavenly Father feedeth them . … Consider the lilies of the field , how they grow ; they toil not , neither do they spin ; and yet I say unto you , that even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these . … Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing ? And one of them shall not fall on the ground without your Father. ’ 20 This means that the solicitude of which the saints are the object on the part of God is of the same kind as that which surrounds the birds and the lilies . The laws of nature regulate the manner in which the sap rises in plants and blossoms out into flowers , in which the birds find their food ; and they are arranged in such a way as to result in beauty . The laws of nature are also providentially arranged in such a way that , in the case of human creatures , the determination to seek first the heavenly Father ’ s kingdom and his justice does not automatically entail death . One can also say , if one likes , that God watches over each bird , each flower and each saint ; it comes to the same thing . The relation of the whole to the parts is natural to the human intelligence . On the plane of events as such , whether one considers the universe as a whole , or as any one of its parts , carved out as seems suitable in space , in time and under whatever classification ; or as another part , or yet another , or a collection of parts : in short , making use of the notions of whole and part as seems to one to be suitable , conformity to the will of God remains invariable . There is as much conformity to the will of God in a leaf which falls unnoticed as in the Flood . On the plane of events , the notion of conformity to the will of God is identical with the notion of reality . On the plane of good and evil , there may or may not be conformity to the will of God , depending upon the relationship to good and evil . Faith in Providence consists in being certain that the universe in its totality is in conformity to the will of God not only in the first sense , but also in the second ; that is to say , that in this universe good outweighs evil . Here it can only be a question of the universe in its totality , for in its individual aspects there is , unfortunately , no room for doubting that evil is present . Thus the object of this certitude is an eternal and universal dispensation constituting the foundation of an invariable order in the world . Divine Providence is never represented in any other form , unless I am mistaken , either in the sacred texts of the Chinese , the Indians and the Greeks , or in the Gospels . But when the Christian religion was officially adopted by the Roman Empire , the impersonal aspect of God and of divine Providence was thrust into the background . God was turned into a counterpart of the Emperor . The operation was rendered easy by the Judaic element in Christianity , of which the latter , owing to its historical origin , had been unable to purge itself . In the texts dating from before the exile , Jehovah ’ s juridical relationship to the Hebrews is that of a master to his slaves . They had been Pharaoh ’ s slaves ; Jehovah , having taken them out of Pharaoh ’ s hands , has succeeded to Pharaoh ’ s rights . They are his property , and he rules them just like any ordinary man rules his slaves , except that he disposes of a wider range of rewards and punishments . He orders them indifferently to do good or evil , but far more often evil , and in either case they have to obey . It matters little that they should be made to obey from the basest motives , provided the orders are duly executed . Such a conception as this was exactly on a par with the feelings and intelligence of the Romans . With them slavery had undermined and degraded all human relations . They disfigured the most beautiful things . They dishonoured suppliants by forcing them to tell lies . They dishonoured gratitude by regarding it as an attenuated form of slavery : according to them , by accepting a favour , one alienated in exchange a portion of one ’ s liberty . If it was a great favour , the prevailing custom made it necessary to say to one ’ s benefactor that one was his slave . They dishonoured love : to be in love with anybody , for them , meant either acquiring the beloved as one ’ s property , or else , if that were not possible , submitting oneself to her slavishly in order to be able to satisfy the lusts of the flesh , even if it meant sharing her with ten or twelve others . They dishonoured patriotism , by conceiving patriotism as the will to reduce all men to slavery who were not their compatriots . But it would be shorter to enumerate what they didn ’ t dishonour . We should probably not find anything . Amongst other things , they dishonoured sovereignty . The ancient conception of legitimate sovereignty , as far as one is able to conjecture , seems to have been extremely beautiful . One can only form a conjecture , for it didn ’ t exist among the Greeks . But very likely it is this conception which survived in Spain until the seventeenth century , and has survived to a much feebler extent in England up to the present time . The Cid , after being brutally and unjustly exiled , and after having conquered with his own right arm much vaster territories than those of the kingdom where he was born , was granted the favour of an interview with the king ; and so soon as he caught sight of the latter in the distance , he leapt from his horse , threw himself on his hands and knees , and kissed the ground . In Lope de Vega ’ s Estrella de Sevilla , the king wishes to prevent an assassin from being condemned to death , because the murder had been secretly ordered by himself . He sends for each of the three judges separately to inform him personally of his royal will . Each of them , on bended knee , assures the king of his absolute allegiance . After which , having come together again as a tribunal , they pass the death sentence unanimously . When the king demands an explanation of their conduct , they reply : ‘ As subjects we accept your authority in all things ; but as judges we only obey our conscience. ’ This conception is that of an unconditional allegiance , but an allegiance paid solely to an hereditary authority , without the slightest regard either for power or possibilities of prosperity or adversity , reward or punishment . It is precisely the same conception as that of obedience to the superior in the monastic orders . A king obeyed in this fashion really was a representative of God in the eyes of his subjects , like the superior of a monastery in the eyes of his monks ; not through any illusion which would have made him appear divine , but solely as the result of a convention which was considered to be divinely ordained . It was a religious respect absolutely free from all idolatry . The same conception of hereditary authority was applied , below the person of the king , from top to bottom of the social scale . The whole of public life was thus permeated by the religious virtue of obedience , like the life of a Benedictine monastery of the best period . Coming to our own era , this conception is still found among the Arabs , where it was observed by T. E. Lawrence ; it existed in Spain up to the time when that unfortunate country became burdened with the grandson of Louis XIV and thus lost its own soul ; it existed in the lands to the south of the Loire until their conquest by France , and even later , for its spirit is still discernible in Théophile de Viau.21 The French monarchy hesitated for a long time between this conception and the Roman one ; but it chose the Roman conception , and that is the reason why any restoration of the monarchy in France is out of the question . We should be only too thankful if any possibility existed of our being able to have a really hereditary form of royalty . There are a certain number of indications which suggest that the Spanish conception of hereditary royalty was the same as that of the Oriental monarchies of antiquity . But the latter too often suffered damage . The Assyrians did it a lot of harm . So did Alexander—that product of Aristotle ’ s pedagogical art , and who was never disowned by his mentor . The Hebrews , those escaped slaves , never knew it . Nor , in all probability , did the Romans either—that handful of adventurers brought together by necessity . What replaced it in Rome was the relationship between master and slave . Already Cicero admitted with shame that he regarded himself as being half the slave of Caesar . From the time of Augustus , the Emperor was looked upon as the master of all the inhabitants of the Roman Empire in the sense of an owner of slaves . Men can not imagine themselves being the victims of wrongs which they find it quite natural to inflict upon others . But when that , in fact , happens , to their own horror , they find it to be quite natural ; in their hearts they can find nothing to produce the necessary indignation and resistance against a form of treatment which they themselves have never been reluctant to inflict . It is so at least when circumstances are such that , even for the imagination , there is nothing that can any longer serve as outward support , when the only possible resource left lies in the depths of the heart . If past crimes have destroyed that resource , total enfeeblement is the result , and one accepts no matter what degree of shame . It is on this mechanism of the human heart that the law of reciprocity is founded , expressed in the Apocalypse in the following terms : ‘ He that leadeth into captivity shall go into captivity ’ .22 Thus it is that a number of Frenchmen , having found it perfectly natural to talk about collaboration to the oppressed natives of the French colonies , went on making use of this word without any trouble in talking with their German masters . In the same way , because the Romans regarded slavery as the basic institution of society , there was nothing that might prompt their hearts to say no to a man who claimed to have an owner ’ s rights over them , and had victoriously upheld that claim by force of arms ; nothing either which might say no to his heirs , whose property they became by right of inheritance . Hence all the cowardly acts whose enumeration sickened the heart of Tacitus , all the more so since he had taken his share in them . They used to commit suicide as soon as they received the order to do so , not otherwise ; a slave can not commit suicide , that would be robbing the master . Caligula used to have standing behind him , as he ate his meals , a row of senators wearing tunics , which was in Rome the characteristic mark of degradation for slaves . At banquets , he would absent himself for a quarter of an hour to take a noblewoman into his private apartments , and then would bring her back flushed and dishevelled to rejoin the other guests , amongst whom was her husband . But these people had always found it perfectly natural to treat not only their slaves in this fashion , but also the colonial peoples of the provinces . And so in the cult of the Emperor , what was made divine was the institution of slavery . Millions of slaves made an idolatrous cult of their owner . It is that which determined the Roman attitude in religious matters . It has been said that they were tolerant . They certainly tolerated all religious practices devoid of any spiritual content . No doubt Hitler , if the fancy took him , would be able to tolerate Theosophy without danger . The Romans were able to tolerate without the least difficulty the cult of Mithras , a faked Orientalism fit for snobs and idle women . There were two exceptions to their tolerance . To begin with , they could naturally not endure that anybody , whoever it might be , should lay claim to property rights over their slaves . Hence their hostility to Jehovah . The Jews were their property and could not have another owner , human or divine . It simply amounted to a dispute between rival slave-owners . Finally , the Romans , out of regard for their prestige and to demonstrate experimentally that they were the masters , practically killed off all the human cattle the ownership of which was in dispute . The second exception was in relation to spiritual life . The Romans could not tolerate anything rich in spiritual content . Love of God is a dangerous fire whose contact could prove fatal to their wretched deification of slavery . So they ruthlessly destroyed spiritual life under all its forms . They very cruelly persecuted the Pythagoreans and all philosophers associated with any authentic traditions . Let it be remarked , by the way , how extremely mysterious it is that a clear patch should once have made it possible for a genuine Stoic , drawing inspiration from Greece and not from Rome , to mount the throne ; and the mystery is redoubled by the fact that he ill-treated the Christians . They wiped out all the Druids in Gaul ; destroyed the Egyptian religious cults ; drowned in blood and brought into disrepute by ingenious calumnies the worship of Dionysus . We know what they did to the Christians at the beginning . Yet they felt ill at ease in their all too vulgar idolatry . Like Hitler , they knew the value of a deceptive exterior of spirituality . They would have liked to take the outer coverings of an authentic religious tradition to act as a cloak for their all too visible atheism . Hitler , too , would be pleased enough to find or found a religion . Augustus attempted to enlist the sympathies of the clergy of Eleusis . The institution of the mysteries of Eleusis had already become almost completely degraded , it is not clear exactly why , in the time of the successors of Alexander . The massacres under Sulla , which filled the streets of Athens with blood like water from a burst dam , can not have done them any good . It is very doubtful whether in the time of the Empire there still remained any trace of the genuine tradition . Nevertheless , the men of Eleusis refused to lend themselves to the transaction . The Christians consented when they were too worn out with being massacred , too disheartened at not seeing the arrival of the triumphant end of the world . It is thus that the Father of Christ , accommodated to the Roman fashion , became a master and owner of slaves . Jehovah furnished the necessary means of transition . There was no longer the least difficulty about welcoming him . There was no longer any dispute over property between the Roman Emperor and him , since the destruction of Jerusalem . The Gospels , it is true , are full of comparisons drawn from slavery . But in Christ ’ s mouth this word is an artifice of love . The ‘ slaves ’ are men who have wanted with all their heart to give themselves to God as slaves . And although that means a gift made on the instant and once and for all , subsequently these slaves never cease for one second begging God to allow them to remain in slavery . That is incompatible with the Roman conception . If we were God ’ s property , how should we be able to give ourselves to him as slaves ? He has emancipated us in view of the fact that he has created us . We are outside his kingdom . Our consent alone can , with time , bring about an inverse operation and convert us into something inert , something analogous to nothingness , where God is absolute master . The truly Christian inspiration has fortunately been preserved by mysticism . But apart from pure mysticism , Roman idolatry has defiled everything—yes , idolatry ; for it is the mode of worship , not the name attributed to the object , which separates idolatry from religion . If a Christian worships God with a heart disposed like that of a pagan of Rome in the homage rendered to the Emperor , that Christian is an idolater also . The Roman conception of God still exists today , even in such minds as that of Maritain . He has written : ‘ The notion of right is even deeper than that of moral obligation , for God has a sovereign right over his creatures and he has no moral obligation towards them ( though he owes it to himself to give them what is required by their nature ) ’ . Neither the notion of obligation nor that of right is compatible with God , but infinitely less so that of right . For the notion of right is infinitely farther removed from pure good . It is mixed up with good and evil ; for the possession of a right implies the possibility of making either a good or a bad use of it . While , on the other hand , the performance of an obligation is always , unconditionally , a good from every point of view . That is why the men of 1789 made such a disastrous mistake when they chose the notion of right as their chief source of inspiration . A sovereign right is the right of property according to the Roman idea , or any other idea essentially similar to it . To ascribe to God sovereign rights without obligations is to turn him into the infinite equivalent of a Roman slave-holder . This can only allow for a servile devotion . The devotion of a slave for the man who looks upon him as his property is a base affair . The love which drives a free man to bring himself body and soul into servitude to what constitutes perfect good , that is the opposite of a servile love . In the mystic traditions of the Catholic Church , one of the main objects of the purifications through which the soul has to pass is the total abolition of the Roman conception of God . So long as a trace of it remains , union through love is impossible . But the spiritual influence of the Mystics was powerless to destroy this conception in the Church as it was destroyed in their own hearts , because the Church needed it as the Empire before had needed it . It was necessary for the Church ’ s temporal dominion . Consequently , the division of power into spiritual and temporal , to which reference is so often made in connexion with the Middle Ages , is a more complicated affair than one imagines . Obedience to the king according to the classic Spanish conception is something infinitely more religious and purer than obedience to a Church armed with an Inquisition , and representing a slave-holding conception of God , as was very largely the case in the thirteenth century . It is , therefore , quite possible that in thirteenth-century Aragon , for instance , it was the king who possessed a really spiritual authority , and the Church which possessed a really temporal authority . Be that as it may , the Roman spirit of imperialism and domination has never loosened its hold over the Church sufficiently for the latter to be able to abolish the Roman conception of God . As a consequence , the conception of Providence has become unrecognizable . Its absurdity is so blatant as to numb the faculties . The true mysteries of the Faith are themselves absurd , but their absurdity is such as to illuminate the mind and cause it to produce in abundance truths which are clear to the intelligence . The other absurdities are maybe diabolical mysteries . Both the former and the latter are found mixed up together in current Christian thought like tares with the wheat . The conception of Providence which corresponds to God after the Roman style is that of a personal intervention in the world on the part of God in order to adjust certain means in view of certain particular ends . It is admitted that the order of the world , if left to itself , and without God ’ s special intervention at a particular moment , for a particular end , could produce effects contrary to the will of God . It is admitted that God should practise such special interventions . But it is further admitted that these interventions , for the purpose of correcting the play of causality , are themselves subject to causality . God violates the natural order of the world so as to bring about therein , not what he wishes to produce , but causes which will produce what he wishes to produce by way of a result . If one reflects on the subject , these suppositions correspond exactly to Man ’ s situation in regard to matter . Man has particular ends which oblige him to make particular interventions that are subject to the law of causality . Let us imagine some great Roman magnate owning vast estates and numbers of slaves , and then multiply this to bring it up to the dimensions of the universe itself . Such is the conception of God which , in fact , rules over a portion of Christianity , and which has perhaps more or less infected the whole of Christianity , with the exception of the Mystics . Let us imagine such an estate-owner living alone , without ever meeting his equals , without any contacts save with his slaves ; one wonders how any particular end could take shape in his mind . All his individual wants are satisfied . Is he likely to consider the good of his slaves ? In that case , he would involve himself in a lot of trouble , for , in fact , his slaves are a prey to crime and affliction . If attempts are made to inspire them with good feelings by enumerating all the happy sides there are to their lot—as doubtless pro-slavery preachers used formerly to do in America—it only serves to show up more clearly just how very limited that side is , what a disproportion there is between the power in the hands of the master and the respective shares in good things and bad . Since this is impossible to conceal , the slaves will be told that if they are wretched , it is because of their own fault . But even if this assertion is accepted , it doesn ’ t throw any light on the problem of knowing what is likely to be the will of the estate-owner . It is impossible to imagine it otherwise than composed of a series of caprices , some of which are benevolent . In fact , that is exactly how one does imagine it to be . All attempts to discover in the structure of the universe evidence of the benevolent intentions of the owner of it are without any exception on the same level as that remark of Bernardin de Saint-Pierre ’ s on the subject of melons and meals en famille.23 There is in all these attempts the same basic absurdity which we find in historical considerations concerning the effects of the Incarnation . The good which it is given to Man to observe in the universe is finite , limited . To endeavour to discern therein evidence of divine action is to turn God himself into a finite , a limited good . It is a blasphemy . Similar attempts in the analysis of history can be illustrated by an ingenious idea expressed in a Catholic review published in New York at the time of the last anniversary of the discovery of America . It said that God had sent Christopher Columbus to America in order that a few centuries later there should be a nation capable of defeating Hitler . This is far worse even than what Bernardin de Saint-Pierre perpetrated ; it is just appalling . God , apparently , also despises coloured races : the wholesale extermination of native American peoples in the sixteenth century seemed to him a small price to pay if it meant the salvation of Europeans in the twentieth ; and he wasn ’ t able to bring them salvation by less sanguinary means . One would have thought that instead of sending Christopher Columbus to America more than four centuries in advance , it would have been simpler to send some one to assassinate Hitler round about the year 1923 . It would be a mistake to imagine that to represent an exceptional degree of stupidity . All providential interpretations of history are unavoidably situated on exactly the same level . It is the case with Bossuet ’ s conception of history . It is at the same time appalling and stupid , equally revolting for the intelligence as for the heart . One has to be more than ordinarily sensitive to the resonance of words to be able to regard this courtier-prelate as a great mind . When the notion of Providence is made to enter private life , the result is no less comical . If lightning falls within an inch of somebody without touching him , he often thinks it is Providence which has preserved him . Those who happen to be a mile away from that spot have no idea that they owe their lives to an intervention on the part of God . Apparently , when the mechanism of the universe is on the point of causing the death of any human being , God asks himself whether it pleases him or not to save the creature ’ s life , and if he decides it does he exerts an imperceptible pressure on the mechanism . He can well change the course of the lightning by an inch in order to save a life , but not by a mile , still less prevent it from falling purely and simply . Evidently people must reason in this fashion ; otherwise they would say to themselves that Providence intervenes in order to prevent us from being killed by lightning at every moment of our lives , to the same extent as at the moment when it falls an inch away from us . The only time when it doesn ’ t intervene to prevent the lightning killing such-and-such a human being is the very instant when the lightning kills him , if that indeed occurs . Everything which doesn ’ t happen is prevented from happening by God to the same extent . Everything which happens is permitted to happen by God to the same extent . The ridiculous conception of Providence as being a personal and particular intervention on the part of God for certain particular ends is incompatible with true faith . But it is not a manifest incompatibility . It is incompatible with the scientific conception of the world ; and in this case the incompatibility is manifest . Christians who , under the influence of education and surroundings , carry within them this conception of Providence , also carry within them the scientific conception of the world , and that divides their minds into two water-tight compartments : one for the scientific conception of the world , the other for the conception of the world as being a field in which God ’ s personal Providence is exercised . This makes it impossible for them really to think either the one or the other . The second one , moreover , will not bear serious scrutiny . Unbelievers , not being inhibited by any motives of reverence , detect easily enough the ridiculous aspect of this personal and particular form of Providence , and religious faith itself is , on account of it , made to seem ridiculous in their eyes . The particular designs that are attributed to God are cuttings made by us from out of the more than infinite complexity of causal connexions . We make them by connecting across time certain events with certain results produced by these events , chosen from amongst thousands of other possible ones . We are right when we declare these cuttings to be in conformity with the will of God . But the same would be just as true , and without any exception , of all the cuttings which could possibly be made by every sort of human or non-human intelligence , on no matter what scale of magnitude , throughout space and time , amid the complexity of the universe . One can not cut out from the continuity of space and time an event as it were like an atom ; but the inadequacy of human language obliges one to talk as though one could . All the events which go to make up the universe in the total stream of time , each one of these events , each possible assemblage of several events , each connexion between two or more events , between two or more assemblages of events , between one event and an assemblage of events—all that , to the same degree , has been permitted by the will of God . All that represents , the particular intentions of God . The sum of the particular intentions of God is the universe itself . Only that which is evil is excluded , and even that must not be wholly excluded , from every single aspect , but solely in so far as it is evil . From every other aspect , it is in conformity to the will of God . A soldier suffering from a very painful wound , and thereby prevented from taking part in a battle in which his entire regiment is wiped out , may think that God has wished , not to make him suffer pain , but to save his life . That represents an extreme naïvety and a snare for self-esteem . God has wished to make him suffer pain , to save his life and to produce all the results which , in fact , have been produced ; but not one of them any more than any other . There is only one case in which it is legitimate to talk about particular volition on the part of God : that is when a particular impulsion arises in a man ’ s soul which bears the unmistakable impress of God ’ s commandments . But it is then a question of God considered as a source of inspiration . The present conception of Providence reminds one of that school exercise called explication française,24 when it is carried out by a bad schoolmaster in connexion with a piece of poetry of the first order . The schoolmaster will say : ‘ The poet used such-and-such a word to obtain such-and-such an effect ’ . That could only be true of poetry of the second , tenth or fiftieth order . In a poetic fragment of the first order , all the effects , all the resonances , all the evocatory qualities capable of being summoned together by the presence of such-and-such a word in such-and-such a place correspond in an equal degree , that is to say , perfectly , to the poet ’ s inspiration . It is the same with all the arts . It is in this way that the poet imitates God . Poetic inspiration at its highest point of perfection is one of the human things which can by analogy furnish a conception of the will of God . The poet is a person ; yet in moments when he reaches poetic perfection , he is shot through by an impersonal inspiration . It is in his mediocre moments that his inspiration is a personal one ; and it is then not really inspiration at all . In using poetic inspiration as an image for representing to oneself by analogy the will of God , one mustn ’ t take the mediocre form but the perfect form . Divine Providence is not a disturbing influence , an anomaly in the ordering of the world ; it is itself the order of the world ; or rather it is the regulating principle of this universe . It is eternal Wisdom , unique , spread across the whole universe in a sovereign network of relations . It is thus that it was conceived throughout pre-Roman antiquity . All the parts of the Old Testament in which the universal inspiration of antiquity has penetrated spread this conception before us clothed in language of incomparable splendour . But we are blind . We read without understanding . Brute force is not sovereign in this world . It is by nature blind and indeterminate . What is sovereign in this world is determinateness , limit . Eternal Wisdom imprisons this universe in a network , a web of determinations . The universe accepts passively . The brute force of matter , which appears to us sovereign , is nothing else in reality but perfect obedience . That is the guarantee accorded to Man , the Ark of the Covenant , the Covenant , the visible and palpable promise here below , the sure basis of hope . That is the truth which bites at our hearts every time we are penetrated by the beauty of the world . That is the truth which bursts forth in matchless accents of joy in the beautiful and pure parts of the Old Testament , in Greece among the Pythagoreans and all the sages , in China with Lao-Tse , in the Hindu scriptures , in Egyptian remains . It lies perhaps hidden in innumerable myths and tales . It will appear to us , before our very eyes , clothed in our own knowledge , if one day God opens our eyes , as He did Hagar ’ s . We perceive it even through the very words in which Hitler affirms the contrary fallacy : ‘ … in a world in which planets and suns follow circular trajectories , moons revolve round planets , and force reigns everywhere and supreme over weakness , which it either compels to serve it docilely or else crushes out of existence … ’ . How should blind force be able to produce circles ? It is not weakness which is the docile servant of force . It is force which is docile to eternal Wisdom . Hitler and his fanatical young followers have never felt that as they looked up at the stars at night . But did anybody ever try to point it out to them ? This civilization we are so proud of has done everything it could to conceal the fact , and so long as there remains any corner in our hearts which is capable of being proud of it , we can not be guiltless of a single one of Hitler ’ s crimes . In India , they have a word whose original meaning is ‘ balance ’ , which stands at the same time for the order of the world and justice . Here is a sacred text on this subject , which , in symbolical form , refers at once to the creation of the world and human society : ‘ God , in truth , existed in the beginning , absolutely alone . Being alone , he did not manifest himself . He created a superior form , sovereignty … That is why there is nothing above sovereignty . That is why on ceremonial occasions the priest is seated above the sovereign … ‘ Still , God did not manifest himself . He created the peasant , artisan and merchant class . ‘ Still he did not manifest himself . He created the servant class . ‘ Still he did not manifest himself . He created a superior form , Justice . Justice is the sovereignty of sovereignties . That is why there is nothing above Justice . Whoever is without power can be equal to him who has great power by means of Justice , as though by means of some royal authority . ‘ What is Justice , the same is also Truth . That is why when some one speaks Truth , we say : “ He is just ” . And when some one speaks Justice , we say : “ He is true ” . It is really because Justice and Truth are the same thing. ’ A very ancient Hindu stanza runs : ‘ That from whence the sun rises , That wherein the sun sets , That , the gods have made Justice , The same today , the same tomorrow. ’ Anaximander has written : ‘ It is out of indeterminateness that things take their birth ; and destruction is a return to indeterminateness , which is accomplished by virtue of necessity . For things are subject to chastisement and expiation at one another ’ s hands , because of their injustice , according to the ordering of time ’ . That is the truth , and not the monstrous conception deduced by Hitler from the vulgarization of modern science . Every visible and palpable force is subject to an invisible limit which it shall never cross . In the sea , a wave mounts higher and higher ; but at a certain point , where there is nevertheless only space , it is arrested and forced to redescend . In the same way , the German flood was arrested , without anybody knowing why , on the shores of the Channel . The Pythagoreans used to say that the universe is constructed out of indeterminateness and the principle that determines , limits , arrests . It is the latter which is always dominant . The tradition concerning the rainbow—surely borrowed by Moses from the Egyptians—expresses in the most touching way the trust which the order of the world should inspire in Man : ‘ And God said : … It shall come to pass , when I bring a cloud over the earth , that the bow shall be seen in the cloud ; and I will remember my covenant , which is between me and you and every living creature of all flesh ; and the waters shall no more become a flood to destroy all flesh ’ .25 The rainbow ’ s beautiful semicircle is the testimony that the phenomena of this world , however terrifying they may be , are all subject to a limit . The magnificent poetry of this text is designed to remind God to exercise his function as a limiting principle . ‘ Thou hast set a bound that they may not pass over ; that they turn not again to cover the earth ’ ( Psalm civ ) . And like the oscillations of the waves , the whole succession of events here below , made up , as they are , of variations in balance mutually compensated—birth and destructions , waxings and wanings—render one keenly alive to the invisible presence of a plexus of limits without substance and yet harder than any diamond . That is why things are beautiful in their vicissitudes , although they allow one to perceive a pitiless necessity . Pitiless , yes ; but which is not force , which is sovereign ruler over all force . But the thought which really enraptured the ancients was this : what makes the blind forces of matter obedient is not another , stronger force ; it is love . They believed that matter was obedient to eternal Wisdom by virtue of the love which causes it to consent to this obedience . Plato , in his Timeus , says that divine Providence dominates necessity by exercising a wise form of persuasion over it . In a Stoic poem of the third century B.C. , but whose inspiration has been proved to be much more ancient , God is addressed thus : ‘ Thee this whole world that revolves around the earth Obeys , whither thou mayest lead it , and accepts thy dominion . Such is the virtue of the servitor thou holdest under thine invincible hands , Two-edged , flaming , eternally living , the lightning. ’ Lightning , the vertical shaft of fire that darts from heaven to earth , is the flash of love passing between God and his creation , which is why ‘ hurler of thunderbolts ’ is the name above all others applied to Zeus . It is from there that the Stoic conception of amor fati , love of the order of the world , regarded by them as the supreme virtue , is derived . The order of the world is to be loved because it is pure obedience to God . Whatever this universe accords us or inflicts on us , it does so exclusively out of obedience . When a friend , long absent and eagerly awaited , grips our hand , it makes no difference whether the pressure exerted be in itself agreeable or painful ; if he grips too hard and hurts us , we don ’ t even notice it . When he speaks , we don ’ t ask ourselves whether the sound of his voice is in itself agreeable . The pressure of the hand , the voice , all is for us just the outward sign of a presence , and in virtue of that fact , infinitely precious . In the same way all that happens to us throughout the course of our life , having been brought about by the total obedience of this universe to God , places us in contact with the absolute good formed by the divine will ; in virtue of this , everything , without any exception , joys and sorrows alike , ought to be welcomed with the same inward attitude of love and thankfulness . Those men who disregard the true good disobey God in the sense that they don ’ t obey him as a thinking creature ought to do , with the consent of the mind . But their bodies and souls are entirely subject to the laws of the mechanisms which rule in sovereign fashion over physical and psychical matter . The physical and psychical matter in them obeys perfectly ; they are perfectly obedient in so far as they are matter , and they are not anything else , if they do not possess nor have any desire for the supernatural light which alone raises Man above matter . That is why the evil they cause us should be accepted in the same spirit as the evil which inert matter causes us . A part from the compassion one ought to show for a human mind that has gone astray and suffers , they should be loved in the same way as inert matter should be loved , as forming part of the perfect beauty of the order of the universe . Naturally , when the Romans felt obliged to dishonour Stoicism by adopting it , they substituted in place of love an insensibility based on pride . Hence the presumption , still common today , that Stoicism and Christianity are opposed to each other , whereas they are really two twin conceptions . The very names of the persons of the Trinity , Logos , Pneuma , are borrowed from the Stoic vocabulary . Knowledge of certain Stoic theories throws a vivid light on several enigmatic passages in the New Testament . A mutual exchange took place between the two conceptions because of their affinities . At the core of each we find humility , obedience and love . But several texts indicate that the Stoic conception was also that of the entire ancient world , right up to the Far East . The whole of humanity once lived inspired by the dazzling conception that the universe in which we find ourselves is nothing else than perfect obedience . The Greeks were thrilled to find in science a startling confirmation of this , and that was the cause of their enthusiasm for it . The operation of the intellect in scientific study makes sovereign necessity over matter appear to the mind as a network of relations which are immaterial and without force . Necessity can only be perfectly conceived so long as such relations appear as absolutely immaterial . They are then only present to the understanding as a result of a pure and lofty concentration emanating from a part of the mind not subjected to force . The part of the human mind that is subjected to force is that part which finds itself under the sway of needs . One has to forget entirely all about needs in order to conceive the relations in their immaterial purity . If one manages to do this , one realizes the play of forces in accordance with which the satisfaction of needs is granted or refused . Forces in this world are supremely determined by necessity ; necessity is made up of relations which are thoughts ; consequently , the force which is supreme in the world is under the supreme domination of thought . Man is a thinking being ; he is therefore on the same side as that which dominates force . He is certainly not lord and master of creation , and Hitler was right in saying that in believing himself to be so he is mistaken ; but he is the master ’ s son , the child of the house . Science is the proof of this . A little child belonging to a wealthy home is in many respects under the control of the servants ; but when he is sitting on his father ’ s knees and identifies himself with him through love , he has a share in the father ’ s authority . So long as Man submits to having his soul taken up with his own thoughts , his personal thoughts , he remains entirely subjected , even in his most secret thoughts , to the compulsion exercised by needs and to the mechanical play of forces . If he thinks otherwise , he is mistaken . But everything changes as soon as , by virtue of a positive act of concentration , he empties his soul so as to allow the conceptions of eternal Wisdom to enter into it . He then carries within himself the very conceptions to which force is subjected . The nature of the relation and the type of indispensable concentration required to conceive it , was in the eyes of the Greeks a proof that necessity is in actual fact obedience to God . They also had another proof . It consisted in the symbols attached to the relations themselves , as the signature of the painter is affixed to a picture . Greek symbolism accounts for the fact that Pythagoras offered up a sacrifice in his joy at having discovered the possibility of drawing a right-angled triangle inside a semicircle . The circle , in the eyes of the Greeks , was the image of God . For a circle which turns upon itself is a movement leading to no change and one completely self-contained . The symbol of the circular movement expressed for them the same truth that is expressed in Christian dogma by the conception of the eternal act on which is based the relationship between the Persons of the Trinity . The mean proportional was in their eyes the image of the divine mediation between God and his creatures . The mathematical researches of the Pythagoreans were concerned with finding out mean proportionals between numbers which don ’ t form part of the same geometrical progression ; for instance , between I and a non-quadrated number . The right-angled triangle supplied them with the solution . The right-angled triangle is the source of all mean proportionals . But since it can be drawn inside a semicircle , the complete circle can be substituted for this purpose . Thus the circle , the geometrical image of God , is the source of the geometrical image of divine mediation . Such a marvellous discovery was worth a sacrifice . Geometry thus becomes a double language , which at the same time provides information concerning the forces that are in action in matter , and talks about the supernatural relations between God and his creatures . It is like those ciphered letters which appear equally coherent before as after deciphering . Concern for the symbol has completely disappeared from our science . And yet , if one were to give oneself the trouble , one could easily find , in certain parts at least of contemporary mathematics , such as the theory of aggregates or the integral calculus , symbols as clear , as beautiful and as full of spiritual meaning as that of the circle and mediation . From modern thought to ancient wisdom the path would be short and direct , if one cared to take it . In contemporary philosophy , analyses likely to lead to a complete theory of sense perception have appeared all over the place under different forms . The fundamental truth which such a theory would reveal is that the reality of objects perceived by the senses does not reside in sensible impressions as such , but solely in the exigencies of which the impressions constitute the signs . This sensible universe in which we find ourselves has no other reality than that of necessity ; and necessity is a combination of relations which fade away as soon as they are not sustained by a pure and lofty concentration on the part of the mind . This universe around us is made up of mind materially present in our flesh . Science , in its different branches , apprehends through all phenomena mathematical relations or what correspond to mathematical relations . Eternal mathematics , that language with a double end in view , that is the stuff of which the order of the world is woven . Every phenomenon is a modification of the distribution of energy , and consequently is determined by the laws of energy . But there are many forms of energy , and they are disposed in a graduated order . Mechanical force , gravity or gravitation in the Newtonian sense , whose compulsion we are continually made to feel , is not the highest form . Light , impalpable and weightless , is a form of energy that , in spite of gravity , makes the trees and the blades of corn shoot upwards . We consume it in corn and in fruit , and its presence inside us gives us the necessary force to stand upright and go about our work . Something infinitely small , under certain conditions , operates in a decisive manner . There is no mass so heavy but that a given point is equal to it ; for a mass will not fall if a single point in it is upheld , provided this point be the centre of gravity . Certain chemical transformations are conditioned by the operation of almost invisible bacteria . Catalysts are imperceptible fragments of matter whose presence is indispensable for bringing about other chemical transformations . Other minute fragments , of almost identical composition , exercise by their presence no less decisive a power of inhibition ; on this mechanism has been founded the most potent of medicaments recently discovered . And so it is not only mathematics but the whole of science which , without our thinking of noticing it , is a symbolical mirror of supernatural truths . Modern psychology is trying to turn the study of the soul into a science . With a little extra precision this could be brought about . It should be founded on the notion of psychic matter , linked with Lavoisier ’ s axiom , which is valid for all forms of matter , ‘ nothing is lost , nothing is created ’ ; or in other words , changes are either modifications of form , beneath which there is something which persists , or else they are displacements ; but never simply appearances and disappearances . The notion of limit should be introduced , and the principle established that , as concerns the terrestrial part of the soul , everything is finite , limited , subject to becoming exhausted . Finally , the notion of energy should be introduced by postulating that psychical phenomena , like physical phenomena , are modifications in the distribution and quality of energy , and are determined by the laws of energetics . Contemporary attempts to create a social science would also lead to a successful issue as the result of a little more precision . It should be founded upon the Platonic notion of the enormous animal , or the apocalyptic notion of the Beast . Social science is the study of the enormous animal and should undertake a minute description of its anatomy , physiology , natural and conditional reflexes , capacity for being broken in . The science of the soul and social science are alike impossible , if the idea of the supernatural is not rigorously defined and introduced into science on the basis of a scientific conception , so as to be handled with the utmost precision in all matters relating to science . If the sciences which have to do with Man were founded in this way , according to methods of mathematical precision , and at the same time maintained in close relationship with religious faith ; if in the natural and mathematical sciences symbolical interpretation were to occupy once again the place it occupied formerly—the unity of the established order in this universe would appear in all its sovereign clarity . The order of the world is the same as the beauty of the world . All that differs is the type of concentration demanded , according to whether one tries to conceive the necessary relations which go to make it up or to contemplate its splendour . It is one and the same thing , which with respect to God is eternal Wisdom ; with respect to the universe , perfect obedience ; with respect to our love , beauty ; with respect to our intelligence , balance of necessary relations ; with respect to our flesh , brute force . Today , science , history , politics , the organization of labour , religion even , in so far as it is marked by the Roman defilement , offer nothing to men ’ s minds except brute force . Such is our civilization . It is a tree which bears the fruit it deserves . A return to truth would make manifest , amongst other things , the truth of physical labour . Physical labour willingly consented to is , after death willingly consented to , the most perfect form of obedience . The penal character of labour , suggested by the account in Genesis , has been misunderstood for want of a just notion regarding punishment . It is a mistake to read into this text the slightest hint of a disdain for labour . It is more likely that it was handed down by some very ancient civilization in which physical labour was honoured above every other activity . There are numerous signs indicating that such a civilization did exist , that long ago physical labour was pre-eminently a religious activity and consequently something sacred . The Mysteries—a religion which embraced the whole of pre-Roman antiquity—were entirely founded upon symbolical expressions concerning the salvation of the soul , drawn from agriculture . The same symbolism is found again in the New Testament parables . The rôle of Hephaistos in the Prometheus of Aeschylus seems to recall a religion of blacksmiths . Prometheus himself is precisely the non-temporal projection of Christ , a crucified and redemptive God who came down to cast fire upon the Earth ; in Greek symbolism as in the New Testament , fire is the image of the Holy Ghost . Aeschylus , who never says anything at random , asserts that the fire given by Prometheus to mankind was the personal property of Hephaistos , which seems to indicate that Hephaistos is its personification . Hephaistos is a god in the form of a blacksmith . One can imagine a blacksmith ’ s religion seeing in fire which renders iron ductile the image of the operation of the Holy Ghost upon human nature . There may perhaps have been a time when an identical truth was translated into different sets of symbols , and when each set was adapted to a certain type of physical labour in such a way as to turn the latter into the direct expression of religious faith . At all events , all the religious traditions of antiquity , including the Old Testament , make the various trades originate in the receipt of direct instructions from God . The majority affirm that God became incarnate in order to carry out this pedagogic mission . The Egyptians , for instance , believed that the incarnation of Osiris had had the double object of such practical instruction together with redemption through his Passion . Whatever the truth may be which is hidden in these extremely mysterious accounts , the belief in direct instruction in the various trades by God implies the memory of a time when the exercise of these trades was above all a sacred activity . No trace of it remains in Homer , nor in Hesiod , nor in classical Greece , nor in the other civilizations of antiquity , so far as our scanty knowledge about them goes . In Greece , labour was held to be servile . We can not know whether this was already so before the invasion of the Hellenes , in the time of the Pelasgi ; nor whether the Mysteries preserved explicitly in their secret doctrines the memory of a time when it had been held in honour . Right at the very beginning of Greek classical times , we perceive the end of a form of civilization in which , save for physical labour , all human activities were looked upon as sacred ; in which art , poetry , philosophy , science and politics were , as it were , indistinguishable from religion . A century or two later , through a process which is obscure to us , but in which money at any rate must have played an immense rôle , all these activities had become exclusively profane and divorced from all religious inspiration . The little of religion which survived was relegated to places specially associated with worship . Plato , in his age , was a survival of an already far-distant past . The Greek Stoics were a burst of flame from a still-living spark belonging to that same past . The Romans , an atheistic and materialistic nation , destroyed systematically whatever remained of spiritual life in the countries occupied by them ; they adopted Christianity only after emptying it of its spiritual content . Under their rule , every human activity without exception became something servile ; and they ended up by taking away all reality from the institution of slavery , which thus prepared for its disappearance , by reducing all human beings indiscriminately to the condition of slaves . The so-called Barbarians , of whom many , doubtless , originally came from Thrace and had imbibed the spiritual influence of the Mysteries , took Christianity seriously ; with the result that we very nearly had a Christian civilization . We can discern the dawn of it in the eleventh and twelfth centuries . The countries to the south of the Loire , which formed the principal radiating centre for it , were impregnated at the same time both with Christian spirituality and ancient spirituality ; at any rate , if it is true that the Albigenses were Manichaeans , and consequently inspired not only by Persian thought , but also by Gnostic , Stoic , Pythagorean and Egyptian thought . The civilization which was then in embryo would have been free from all taint of slavery . The different trades would have occupied the place of honour . The picture that Machiavelli draws of Florence in the twelfth century is a model of what in modern jargon would be called a syndicalist democracy . At Toulouse , knights and workmen fought side by side against Simon de Montfort to defend the spiritual treasures common to both . The corporations established in the course of this period of gestation were religious institutions . All we need to do is to look at a Romanesque church , listen to a Gregorian melody , read one of the perfect poems of the troubadours , or better still , the liturgical texts , in order to recognize that art and religious faith were as indistinguishable from one another as they were in ancient Greece at its highest point . But a Christian civilization in which the light of Christianity would have illuminated the whole of life , would only have been possible if the Roman conception of enslaving people ’ s minds adopted by the Church had been cast aside . The relentless and victorious struggle waged by St. Bernard against Abelard shows how very far this was from happening . At the beginning of the thirteenth century , this civilization still in process of formation was destroyed by the ruin of its principal centre , that is to say , the lands to the south of the Loire , the setting up of the Inquisition and the stifling of religious thought under the sign of orthodoxy . The conception of orthodoxy , by rigorously separating the domain relating to the welfare of souls , which is that of an unconditional subjection of the mind to external authority , from the domain relating to so-called profane matters , in which the intelligence remains free , makes impossible that mutual penetration of the religious and the profane which would be the essence of a Christian civilization . It is in vain that every day , at Mass , a little water is mixed with the wine . The thirteenth and fourteenth centuries and the early part of the fifteenth are the period of medieval decadence . They show the progressive degradation and final eclipse of a civilization which was stillborn , the progressive desiccation of a single germ-cell . About the fifteenth century came the first Renaissance , which was like a feeble foretaste of the resurrection of pre-Roman civilization and of the spirit of the twelfth century . The Greece of classical times , Pythagoras , Plato , then became the objects of a religious veneration that went in perfect harmony with the Christian faith . But this attitude of mind was of very brief duration . Shortly afterwards came the second Renaissance with quite the opposite tendency . It is the latter which has produced what we call our modern civilization . We are very proud of it , but we also know that it is sick . And everybody is agreed about the diagnosis of the sickness . It is sick because it doesn ’ t know exactly what place to give to physical labour and to those engaged in physical labour . Many intelligent minds exhaust themselves over this problem , groping about in the dark . No one knows where to begin , what basis to go on , what method to follow ; and so all these efforts come to nothing . The best thing to do seems to be to ponder over the old account in Genesis , situating it in its own proper atmosphere , that of ancient conceptions . When a human being has , by committing a crime , placed himself outside the current of the Good , his true punishment consists in his reintegration into the plenitude of that current by means of suffering . There is nothing so marvellous as a punishment . Man placed himself outside the current of Obedience . God chose as his punishments labour and death . Consequently , labour and death , if Man undergoes them in a spirit of willingness , constitute a transference back into the current of supreme Good , which is obedience to God . This takes on a luminous clarity if , as in antiquity , one looks upon the passivity of inert matter as the perfection of obedience to God , and upon the beauty of the world as the radiance of this perfect Obedience . Whatever , in heaven , may be the mysterious significance of death , on earth it is the transformation of a being composed of palpitating flesh and of mind , of a being who loves and hates , hopes and fears , wants and doesn ’ t want , into a little pile of inert matter . Man ’ s consent to such a transformation represents his supreme act of total obedience . That is why St. Paul says of Christ himself , in connexion with the Passion : ‘ … yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered , and was made perfect. ’ 26 But consent to suffer death can only be fully real when death is actually at hand . It can only come near to plenitude when death itself is near . When the prospect of death is abstract and distant , it is abstract too . Physical labour is a daily death . To labour is to place one ’ s own being , body and soul , in the circuit of inert matter , turn it into an intermediary between one state and another of a fragment of matter , make of it an instrument . The labourer turns his body and soul into an appendix of the tool which he handles . The movements of the body and the concentration of the mind are a function of the requirements of the tool , which itself is adapted to the matter being worked upon . Death and labour are things of necessity and not of choice . The world only gives itself to Man in the form of food and warmth if Man gives himself to the world in the form of labour . But death and labour can be submitted to either in an attitude of revolt or in one of consent . They can be submitted to either in their naked truth or else wrapped around with lies . Labour does violence to human nature . At times there is a superabundance of youthful energy eager to spend itself and not finding a suitable outlet ; at other times there is exhaustion and the will has ceaselessly to supplement , at the expense of a very great strain on itself , the lack of physical energy ; there are a thousand and one preoccupations , worries , anxieties , a thousand and one desires , interests which take the mind elsewhere ; monotony brings with it disgust , and time hangs with an almost intolerable heaviness . The human mind dominates time and ceaselessly and rapidly surveys the past and the future , leaping over any sort of interval ; but he who labours is subject to time in the same way as inert matter that can only move slowly from one moment to the next . It is in this way , above all , that labour does violence to human nature . Which is why those who labour signify the suffering labour causes them by the expression ‘ finding the hours drag ’ . Consent to suffer death , when death is there and seen in all its nakedness , constitutes a final , sudden wrenching away from what each one calls ‘ I ’ . Consent to perform labour is of a less violent nature . But where it is absolute , it is renewed each morning throughout the entire length of a human existence , day after day , and each day it lasts until the evening , and it starts again on the following day , and this goes on often until death . Each morning the labourer consents to perform his labour for that day , and for the rest of his life . He consents to perform it whether he feels sad or happy , worried or ready for amusement , tired or bursting with energy . Immediately next in order after consent to suffer death , consent to the law which makes work indispensable for conserving life represents the most perfect act of obedience which it is given to Man to accomplish . It follows that all other human activities , command over men , technical planning , art , science , philosophy and so on , are all inferior to physical labour in spiritual significance . It is not difficult to define the place that physical labour should occupy in a well-ordered social life . It should be its spiritual core . 1 National Revolution : a reference to the Vichy Government ’ s declared programme of a ‘ Révolution Nationale ’ , that is to say , a national regeneration . [ Translator . ] 2 ‥ in June 1936 : a reference to the big sitdown strike of that year , when important factories and industrial plants , such as the Renault works , were occupied by the employees for some days . [ Translator . ] 3 Ecoles : see note p. 176 . [ Translator . ] 4 Quotation : Matt . vii , 16–18 . [ Translator . ] 5 Gringoire : see note p. 38 . [ Translator . ] 6 See first footnote on page 194 . [ Translator . ] 7 Camille Jullian : historian ( 1859–1933 ) , and the author of a remarkable Histoire de la Gaule . [ Translator . ] 8 Academy : the Académie Française . [ Translator . ] 9 Institut Catholique : famous Catholic centre of higher education in Paris , situated rue d ’ Assas . [ Translator . ] 10 ‘ good ’ and ‘ wicked ’ : as in text . [ Translator . ] 11 … the only work … : Phèdre : see p. 233 . [ Translator . ] 12 Palais de la Découverte : one of the main attractions of the French Exhibition of 1937 . [ Translator . ] 13 Le Dantec : Félix Le Dantec ( 1869–1917 ) , biologist , and amongst other things the author of a little work on atheism . [ Translator . ] 14 Bonnot ’ s ‘ bandits tragiques ’ : the name given by the press of the time ( 1912 ) to a gang of terrorists led by a certain Bonnot . These men , some of whom professed anarchistic tenets , committed a whole series of crimes in various parts of Paris , before being finally overcome by police forces armed with dynamite . [ Translator . ] 15 note au compte rendu : advance notification of a report ; term apparently used in scientific circles . [ Translator . ] 16 ‘ Cet esprit de mensonge … ’ : from Athalie , Act I , sc . 2 . The exact quotation is : ‘ Répandre cet esprit d ’ imprudence et d ’ erreur , ’ etc . [ Translator . ] 17 Quotation : John xv , 24 and 22 . [ Translator . ] 18 Quotation : Matt , xi , 21 . [ Translator . ] 19 Quotation : John xx , 29 . [ Translator . ] 20 Quotation : Matt . vi , 26 , 28 , 29 and x , 29 . [ Translator . ] 21 Théophile de Viau : see note p. 178 . [ Translator . ] 22 Quotation : Revelation xiii , 10 . [ Translator . ] 23 … meals ‘ en famille ’ : Bernardin de Saint-Pierre was so convinced of the essential harmony in Nature , that he thought he saw a divine significance in the fact that melons indicate from the outside their division into slices , which was an unmistakable sign that they were meant to be eaten en famille . [ Translator . ] 24 ‘ explication française ’ : a practical educational exercise in French schools , and which consists in analysing a given text from every point of view : language , meaning , derivation , relationship to other texts , etc . [ Translator . ] 25 Quotation : Genesis ix , 14–15 . [ Translator . ] 26 Quotation : Hebrews v , 8 and 9 . [ Translator . ] Waiting on God A work first published in English in 1951 , Waiting on God forms the best possible introduction to the work of Simone Weil , for it brings us into direct contact with this amazing personality , at once so pure , so ardent , so utterly sincere , yet normally so reserved that only her closest friends guessed the secrets of her inner life . The first part of the book concerns her letters written to the Reverend Father Perrin , O.P. , who befriended her at Marseilles and , the only priest she knew , became her intimate friend . The second part of the book concerns essays and reflections on such subjects as education , human affliction and the love of God , prayer , and forms of the implicit love of God . Waiting on God Simone Weil With a Foreword by Malcolm Muggeridge First published in Great Britain in 1951 by Routledge & Kegan Paul Ltd This edition first published in 2010 by Routledge 2 Park Square , Milton Park , Abingdon , Oxon , OX14 4RN Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada by Routledge 270 Madison Avenue , New York , NY 10016 Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group , an informa business Translated from the French by Emma Craufurd This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library , 2009 . To purchase your own copy of this or any of Taylor & Francis or Routledge ’ s collection of thousands of eBooks please go to www.eBookstore.tandf.co.uk . Translation © 1951 , 1979 Routledge & Kegan Paul Foreword © 1979 Malcolm Muggeridge All rights reserved . No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic , mechanical , or other means , now known or hereafter invented , including photocopying and recording , or in any information storage or retrieval system , without permission in writing from the publishers . Publisher ’ s Note The publisher has gone to great lengths to ensure the quality of this reprint but points out that some imperfections in the original copies may be apparent . Disclaimer The publisher has made every effort to trace copyright holders and welcomes correspondence from those they have been unable to contact . ISBN 0-203-09247-3 Master e-book ISBN ISBN 13:978-0-415-56238-6 ( hbk ) ISBN 13:978-0-203-09247-7 ( ebk ) eISBN :978-0-2030924-7-7 ISBN 10:0-415-56238-4 ( hbk ) ISBN 10:0-203-09247-3 ( ebk ) WAITING ON GOD Waiting on God SIMONE WEIL Foreword by Malcolm Muggeridge First published in Great Britain in 1951 by Routledge & Kegan Paul Ltd This edition first published in 1979 by Routledge & Kegan Paul 39 Store Street , London WC1E 7DD and Broadway House , Newtown Road , Henley-on-Thames , Oxon RG9 1EN First published in France in 1950 as Attente de Dieu Translated from the French by Emma Craufurd This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library , 2009 . To purchase your own copy of this or any of Taylor & Francis or Routledge ’ s collection of thousands of eBooks please go to www.eBookstore.tandf.co.uk . Translation © Routledge & Kegan Paul , 1951 , 1979 Foreword © Malcolm Muggeridge 1979 No part of this book may be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher , except for the quotation of brief passages in criticism British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data Weil , Simone Waiting on God.—2nd ed 1 . Christianity—Philosophy I . Title 201 BR100 ISBN 0-203-09247-3 Master e-book ISBN ISBN 0 7100 0248 3 FOREWORD Interest in the life and writings of Simone Weil has gone on steadily increasing since her death in 1943 at the age of thirty-four . At the time of her death her only published work consisted of a few articles in obscure periodicals and , apart from some leftist trade unionists and Gaullists she worked with at their war-time headquarters in London , she was unknown outside the circle of her friends and family . From one of her letters to Fr Perrin , the Dominican priest who became her friend and counsellor in 1942 when she was waiting in Marseilles for a boat to take her and her parents to America , it is apparent that this obscurity troubled her ; she writes to him that ‘ if no one consents to take any notice of the thoughts which , though I can not explain why , have settled in so inadequate a being as myself , they will be buried with me. ’ There follows a strong hint that Fr Perrin himself should act as her literary executor ; at the same time , characteristically , she felt bound to make it clear to him that if he undertook this responsibility , he must not suppose that he would thereby be serving his Church , which , she explains at some length , she has no intention , or indeed possibility , of joining , except perhaps on her deathbed . As things turned out , she and Fr Perrin were never to see one another again , but he scrupulously preserved all her writings that came into his possession , and in due course made them available for publication , thus performing a signal service to Simone ’ s memory , as well as to all seekers after truth , to all—as she likes to call them—friends of God . The Perrin papers , all included in this volume , are themselves of inestimable value , constituting , as they do , far the most interesting and revealing of her writings about herself , and it is difficult to believe that in any circumstances they would have been lost to posterity . Her fear that they might disappear without trace recalls how Pascal ’ s sister , Gilberte , in her charming memoir of her brother , bewailed the fact that , owing to his early death , his life work , his great apologia for the Christian faith , was never to be realized , since only a confused pile of scribbled notes relating to it were found among his papers . These notes were the Pensées , which for three centuries now have edified and delighted successive generations of readers precisely because they are so succinct , spontaneous and luminous . It is quite possible that , had Pascal lived to work them up into a long , considered thesis , the impact might have been much less . Simone ’ s life story is brief and rather tragic—even at times tragi-comic . Essentially , she was a characteristic product of a time like ours , in which the term ‘ displaced person ’ has been devised as a bleak bureaucratic version of the Biblical phrase , ‘ a stranger in a strange land ’ —a description of what all mystics at all times have felt themselves to be . The essential facts are contained in Jacques Caboud ’ s Simone Weil , A Fellowship in Love , and , in greater detail , in her friend Simone Petrement ’ s full-length biography , recently published in English . In doing the commentary for Vernon Sproxton ’ s BBC television programme on Simone Weil , Pilgrim of the Absolute , I had occasion to visit the Weil family ’ s apartment on the Rue Auguste Comte overlooking the Luxembourg Gardens , kept still very much as it was when Simone lived there . I also had the great pleasure of making the acquaintance of Simone ’ s brother André , now a mathematician of international reputation at the Princeton Institute for Advanced Study . He gave me a vivid account of his and Simone ’ s very happy childhood , in the process exploding a number of mythical anecdotes ; for instance , one to the effect that during the First World War he and Simone had volunteered to forego their allowance of sweets to contribute towards sending food parcels to a soldier at the Front . Nothing of the sort happened , he insists . In my experience , pretty well all anecdotes are mythical or apocryphal . Another example in Simone ’ s case is the often-repeated anecdote that she and Simone de Beauvoir passed first and second into the École Normale Supérieure . Actually , Simone de Beauvoir never attended the École Normale ; Jacques Soustelle who was a fellow-student there with Simone Weil , told me this , and even showed me a list of students in his and Simone Weil ’ s time , with no Simone de Beauvoir among them . The only encounter in the flesh between the two Simones was by chance , in a lift , at which neither uttered . André Weil remembers his and Simone ’ s companionship as children as being full of gaiety and laughter—a side of his sister that has largely , alas , got left out in her own recollections of herself , and in those of others , but which undoubtedly existed . To have , as she had , a heightened sense of eternity , is not to laugh less , but to laugh more ; hence the gargoyles alongside the steeples in the great medieval cathedrals . Soustelle remembered her at the École Normale as being decidedly earnest , certainly , but still by no means destitute of humour . In her dress and bearing , he said , she went out of her way to make herself physically unattractive , which was entirely in character . Snapshots of her when she was young suggest that she was really rather pretty . The family were Jewish , the father a doctor , a general practitioner , modest and quiet and competent , the mother effusive , opinionated and , I suspect , inclined to be domineering . André confirmed that his own rapid progress with his school studies gave Simone the feeling that she was no more than a plodder , though in fact she , too , in her own way was a brilliant student . Re-reading Simone Weil ’ s writings , and thinking about her , I have been more than ever struck by the close parallel between her and George Orwell , who was also , incidentally , obsessed with the notion that he was physically unattractive . They were both possessed with a passion to identify themselves with the downtrodden and oppressed , which they sought to achieve by sharing their way of life and experiencing their deprivations , often with bizarre results . Orwell , for instance , sought to cover up his Etonian traces by wearing a sort of proletarian fancy dress , rolling his own cigarettes and punctilously frequenting public rather than saloon bars , and Simone conscientiously did stints as a factory and agricultural worker , but neither managed to achieve the identification they sought . In the course of filming Pilgrim of the Absolute I interviewed a fellow-worker of Simone ’ s at the Renault Works , where she was employed between 6 June and 12 August 1935 . Over an excellent luncheon which he hospitably provided at his apartment near the Works , he spoke of Simone with the utmost affection and admiration , but explained that of course she really had no notion of what a worker ’ s life was like , and was unable herself to achieve even minimum efficiency owing to her absent-mindedness and congenital clumsiness . Both Orwell and Simone made their way to Spain during the Civil War to fight on the Republican side . Orwell joined the anarchist-syndicalists in Barcelona , Simone joined them in Aragon in the neighbourhood of Saragossa ; he soon got wounded , and she , to her great chagrin , was put to work as a cook instead of being posted to the front line as a combatant , and managed to spill a basin of boiling oil over her left leg , thereby seriously injuring herself . Hearing of this calamity , her parents descended upon her and took her back to Paris . The whole episode lasted less than two months . Both Orwell and Simone were outraged at the treachery and brutality of the official Communists in their dealings with the anarchists , which he exposed in his book Homage to Catalonia , and she in her Letter to Georges Bernanos , to the considerable disgust of more gullible leftists . Again , in the Second World War both of them went through the same kind of trauma . Orwell wanted desperately to be a belligerent , but his physical con-dition had greatly deteriorated and he was turned down for the army , having to content himself with a visit to soi-disant liberated Paris as correspondent for the Observer . Simone , having escaped from occupied France with her parents and reached New York via Marseilles , managed to get herself attached to the Gaullist set-up in London , thanks largely to the good offices of Maurice Schumann , another fellow-student at the École Normale Supérieure . There she languished , being denied her dearest wish , which was to be dropped by parachute in France to join the Resistance . Though she was not told , the real reason she was considered unsuitable for such a mission was her strongly Jewish appearance which , in the conditions of occupied France , would have made her immediately noticeable , and so have jeopardized any Resistance organization she might contact . Instead of the heroic role and noble martyrdom she so pined for , she was put to work preparing a report on the post-war reconstruction of France . All the same , she threw herself into this with her usual ardour and industry . The result was her book , L ’ Enracinement , published in English in 1949 as The Need for Roots , the most sustained and cogent political writing she produced , but little heeded by the London Gaullists concerned , as they inevitably were , with winning the war rather than with what came afterwards . I asked Soustelle who , at the time , was head of de Gaulle ’ s Intelligence Service , why so perceptive and even prophetic a report should have been so ignored , and he replied , sagely I thought : ‘ Her kingdom was not of this world. ’ In rather the same sort of way , another disappointed warrior , Evelyn Waugh , was sent home from active service to write Brideshead Revisited . In London Simone fell into a state of despair , and largely gave up eating , ostensibly on the ground that she did not feel she ought to eat more than the standard rations available in France . Actually , though there were acute shortages in some regions of France , notably the South , generally speaking French civilians fed better than their English counterparts . In medical terms , Simone was doubtless suffering from anorexia , and in her weakening condition developed symptoms of tuberculosis . She was sent first to the Middlesex Hospital , London , then to a sanatorium at Ashford in Kent , where she died . I interviewed the doctor who attended her , and he described to me how in the end she just could not be induced or coaxed to eat anything at all . In view of the circumstances of her death , there was an inquest which brought in a verdict of suicide . She is buried in Ashford Cemetery ; a gravestone with a simple inscription marks the place , and some unknown hand has added in Italian : La mia solitudine l ’ altrui dolore germivo fino all morte—My solitude encompassed the grief of others till my death ; it seems an appropriate final comment . Orwell also expedited his own end by insisting , when the tuberculosis from which he died was already in an advanced state , on living in an isolated , wind-swept house on the Island of Jura which in stormy weather was completely cut off from the mainland of Scotland . Conditions were very harsh , particularly for someone as sick as he was , and medical attention difficult to procure . It was in these circumstances that he worked away feverishly at Nineteen Eighty-Four . By the time it was finished his physical state was beyond repair . So the strange parallelism between him and Simone continued right to the end . In support of this parallelism let me add the testimony of the late Richard Rees , a close friend of Orwell , and himself a kind of mystic and saint , who wrote studies of both Orwell and Simone ( George Orwell : Fugitive from the Victor ’ s Camp and Simone Weil : A sketch for a Portrait ) , which I consider still to be the most perceptive yet undertaken . I always think of Orwell , like Cervantes ’ s hero , as a Knight of the Woeful Countenance , and of Simone as an Orwell in petticoats , a Donna Quixote . What she had , however , that Orwell notably lacked—ostensibly , he never deviated from a rigid agnosticism—was an ardent Christian faith , to which increasingly she related all her judgments and conclusions . In one of her letters to Fr Perrin she describes how , in the Easter week of 1938 , during a stay at the Benedictine Abbey of Solemes , she became captivated by George Herbert ’ s lines entitled Love , beginning : Love bade me welcome , yet my soul drew back , Guiltie of dust and sin , … and how then Christ came down and took possession of her . Thenceforth , He was the centre of her existence , the focus of her mind , the point of reference of all her questing and questioning . As T.S.Eliot has pointed out , this personal devotion to our Lord and love for Him saved her from pitfalls into which a certain pedantry and intellectual arrogance in her temperament might well have led her . None the less , it did not , as she explains with apologies , but forcefully , to Fr Perrin , induce her to seek admission to the Roman Catholic Church , or even baptism . She remained a spiritual loner , hungry for the Sacraments she yet did not feel entitled to receive , unable , or unwilling , to bend her mind to the yoke of orthodoxy , cut off from the body of believers and their collective worship . Yet , what purity in her thinking , what luminosity in her believing and sanctity in her life and character ! There are saints for all seasons—Augustine for the decline and fall of Rome , Aquinas for the Middle Ages , Pascal for the Renaissance and the Enlightenment , Loyola for the Counter-Reformation , Newman for the aftermath of industrialism . Simone belongs indubitably to the saints of the twentieth century , in company with Camus , Bonhoeffer , Mother Teresa . It is a strange and special role , difficult to define in terms of specific beliefs and doubts , but which we recognize when we meet it—an ultimate and overwhelming disinterestedness , a passionate preoccupation with eternity combined with an equally passionate concern with Now ; a weird blend of other-worldliness at its most mystical and worldliness at its most compelling ; a gazelle meticuously picking its way through the interminable turbulence of a motorway ’ s traffic . I think of Mother Teresa very seriously asking her lepers as they come back from begging in the streets of Calcutta how much they have managed to collect-as it might be a Rothschild asking his stockbroker how his shares were doing ; of Simone Weil seeking access to President Roosevelt with a view to gaining his support for a plan to post nurses in the front battle line so that they might be on hand to attend to the wounded at once—a plan which , incidentally , led to de Gaulle ’ s only recorded observation about Simone : ‘ Elle est folle ! ’ Two instances of contemporary sainthood , derived , I suppose , from the master-image of all—a woman , Mary , with God hanging on her breast . There is no writing that I know of which more perfectly expresses the perplexities and ardours of a contemporary saint than Simone Weil ’ s . Waiting on God is a choice collection , which I hope will induce readers to explore further ; her Letters , her Journals , the now considerable body of her oeuvre , the great bulk of which is available in English . Malcolm Muggeridge NOTE 1 Simone Weil was born in Paris on 3rd February , 1909 . The house of her birth in the Boulevard de Strasbourg has since been pulled down to make room for the Rue de Metz . Thanks to her brother André , who was her elder by three years , she was exceptionally advanced in her knowledge of literature and science . At six she could quote passages of Racine by heart and , although her studies were constantly interrupted as a result of the first world war , she obtained her baccalaureat es lettres with distinction in June , 1924 , at the age of fifteen . The president of the board of examiners , who was a specialist in the literature of the early Middle Ages , gave her 19 out of 20 after her oral test . During her year of Philosophy she worked under La Senne ; then she had Alain2 as her master for two years at the Henry IV College when she prepared for the competitive entrance examination of the Ecole Normale . Alain , who recognized that she had philosophical genius and saw in her ‘ a power of thought which was rare , ’ followed her development with attentive and kindly interest , noting however that she had to be on her guard against too close reasoning expressed in almost impenetrable language and that , in the end , ‘ she had been willing to turn from the deep abstract subtleties which were a game for her and to train herself in direct analysis. ’ She entered the Ecole Normale Supérieure in 1938 , left as a qualified teacher of philosophy in 1931 and was appointed to the secondary school for girls at Puy . There , from December , 1931 until the Spring of 1932 , she gave public proof of her uncompromising opposition towards official compulsion , helping and encouraging the unemployed workmen of the town by her marked sympathy and leadership in their disputes with the municipal authorities . She had friends in the group of the Revolution Prolétarienne , and in 1932 she began to contribute to this review . She was thus given an opportunity of expressing in clear and accurate terms and with a real knowledge of human problems , her main ideas and her feeling about the condition of the workers . Appointed to a school at Auxerre in October , 1932 , and in 1933 to one at Roanne , she then decided to take a year ’ s leave so that she could experience fully the working people ’ s life to which she had already tried to accustom herself by working in the fields of the Jura during the summer months . Having taken a job in the Renault Works , she hired a room in a neighbouring house and strove , in spite of the headaches and delicate health which she had always had to contend with , to avoid anything which could make her lot differ in the slightest degree from that of her companions in the workshop . When her leave came to an end in 1935 , she again took a teaching post , this time at the girls ’ secondary school at Bourges She left in the summer of 1936 to go to Barcelona in the beginning of August . She wanted to be able to judge for herself of the struggle between the ‘ Reds ’ and the ‘ Francoites. ’ During the following October she returned to France after having shared the sufferings of the Republican army for several weeks on the Catalonian front , and having experienced in the very depths of her being the utter calamity of war . Another spell of leave , this time on account of illness , prevented her from taking up before 1937 an appointment at the secondary school for girls at Saint Quentin . Once more , in January , 1938 , her health obliged her to stop working until the time when the second world war broke out . On June 13th , 1940 , she decided to leave Paris and she settled at Marseilles in October of the same year . In June , 1941 , a friend introduced her to the Reverend Father Perrin , who was then at the Dominican Convent in Marseilles and who , two years later , was to be arrested by the Gestapo . Father Perrin introduced her to Gustave Thibon with whom she stayed for a while in Ardèche . There , once more impelled by her longing to share in a life of direct contact with the soil , she engaged in manual work , either in the fields during the harvest , or in the vineyards at the time of the grape-gathering . She did not on that account give up any of her studies of philosophy , whether Greek or Hindu , and went on widening her knowledge of Sanskrit . At the same time her mystical tendencies and her preoccupation with the notion of God became more pronounced , leading her to write the pages on the ‘ Our Father ’ and on the Love of God which are to be read further on . On returning to Marseilles for the winter she continued her talks and discussions with Father Perrin and at his request she expounded her thoughts on Plato and the Pythagoreans to the circle that used to meet in the crypt of the Dominican Convent there . When Father Perrin was chosen as Superior at Montpellier , in March , 1942 , he did not lose contact with Simone Weil . They went on meeting , writing letters and exchanging their views right up to the time when Simone left France . It was probably on 15th May , 1942 , that she wrote the long letter which she calls her ‘ spiritual autobiography ’ to Father Perrin , then away on a journey . Her boat left the port on 17th May . She spent three weeks at Casablanca , in a camp where all the travellers in transit from France to America were confined . Here she prepared a certain number of her papers . These she sent to Father Perrin as a spiritual legacy , and , on 26th May , in a last letter of farewell , she completed and added to that of 15th May . After reaching New York at the end of June , 1942 , she received a call to serve under the French provisional government and left for England on 10th November . In London she was commissioned to make a study of official documents ; she outlined plans and wrote a long memorandum on the rights and duties , either reciprocal or united , of the State and the individual.1 She wanted to share the hardships of those she had left in France and carried this to such a point that , although overtired and run down , she refused the extra nourishment ordered by the doctors and kept strictly to the rations to which her compatriots in the occupied zone were limited at that time . The state of her health became so much worse that , in the second fortnight of April , 1943 , she was admitted to the Middlesex Hospital , whence she was transferred in the middle of August to a sanatorium at Ashford in Kent . The last sentence she wrote in the note-book which they found afterwards was : ‘ The most important part of education—to teach the meaning of to know ( in the scientific sense ) . ’ The whole of Simone Weil is contained in these few words . A day or two later , on 29th August , 1943 , she died at Ashford . The correspondence here published and the essays which follow were all sent or given to the Reverend Father Perrin by Simone Weil , at the time when she was still able to communicate with him . In giving this collection of letters and essays the title of WAITING ON GOD , the publisher has sought to suggest a favourite thought of Simone Weil which she expressed in the Greek words en hypomene : waiting in patience . 1 This Note , provided by the French publishers , replaces the Introduction and notes by the Reverend J.M.Perrin , which are withdrawn at their request . 2 Pseudonym of the well-known French philosopher and essayist , Emile Auguste Chartier , born in 1868 . 1 Published as L ’ Enracinement , Paris ( Gallimard ) 1949 . Eng . trans . : The Need for Roots ( Routledge & Kegan Paul ) , 1951. LETTERS LETTER I HESITATIONS CONCERNING BAPTISM 19th January 1942 My Dear Father , I have made up my mind to write to you…to bring our conversations about my case toa conclusion—that is to say pending further developments . I am tired of talking to you about myself , for it is a wretched subject , but I am obliged to do so by the interest you take in me as a result of your charity . I have been wondering lately about the will of God , what it means and how we can reach the point of conforming ourselves to it completely—I will tell you what I think about this . We have to distinguish between three domains . First that which is absolutely independent of us ; it includes all the accomplished facts in the whole universe at the moment , and everything which is happening or going to happen later beyond our reach . In this domain everything which comes about is in accordance with the will of God , without any exception . Here then we must love absolutely everything , as a whole and in each detail , including evil in all its forms ; notably our own past sins , in so far as they are past ( for we must hate them in so far as their root is still present ) , our own sufferings , past , present and to come , and—what is by far the most difficult—the sufferings of other men in so far as we are not called upon to relieve them . In other words , we must feel the reality and presence of God through all external things , without exception , as clearly as our hand feels the substance of paper through the pen-holder and the nib . The second domain is that which is placed under the rule of the will . It includes the things that are purely natural , close , easily recognised by the intelligence and the imagination , and among which we can make our choice , arranging them from outside so as to provide means to fixed and finite ends . In this domain we have to carry out , without faltering or delay , everything which appears clearly to be a duty . When any duty does not appear clearly , we have sometimes to observe rules which are more or less arbitrarily established , but fixed ; and sometimes to follow our inclination , but in a limited degree ; for one of the most dangerous forms of sin , or perhaps the most dangerous , consists of introducing what is unlimited into a domain which is essentially finite . The third domain is that of the things , which , without being under the empire of the will , without being related to natural duties , are yet not entirely independent of us . In this domain we experience the compulsion of God ’ s pressure , on condition that we deserve to experience it and exactly to the extent that we deserve to do so . God rewards the soul which thinks of him with attention and love , and he rewards it by exercising a compulsion upon it which is strictly and mathematically in proportion to this attention and this love . We have to abandon ourselves to the pressure , to run to the exact spot whither it impels us and not go one step further , even in the direction of what is good . At the same time we must go on thinking about God with ever increasing love and attentiveness , in this way gaining the favour of being impelled ever further and becoming the object of a pressure which possesses itself of an ever growing proportion of the whole soul . When the pressure has taken possession of the whole soul , we have attained the state of perfection . But whatever stage we may have reached , we must do nothing more than we are irresistibly impelled to do , not even in the way of goodness . I have also been thinking about the nature of the sacraments , and I will tell you what I think about this subject as well . The sacraments have a specific value which constitutes a mystery , in so far as they involve a certain kind of contact with God , a contact which is mysterious but real . At the same time they have a purely human value , in so far as they are symbols or ceremonies . Under this second aspect they do not differ essentially from the songs , gestures and words of command of certain political parties ; at least in themselves they are not essentially different ; of course they are infinitely different by the doctrine which underlies them . I think that most believers , including some who are really persuaded of the opposite , approach the sacraments only as symbols and ceremonies . Foolish as the theory of Durkheim may be in confusing what is religious with what is social , it yet contains an element of truth ; that is to say that the social feeling is so much like the religious as to be mistaken for it . It is like it just as a false diamond is like a real one , so that those who have no spiritual discernment are effectively taken in . For the matter of that , a social and human participation in the symbols and ceremonies of the sacraments is an excellent and healthy thing , in that it marks a stage of the journey , for those who travel that way . Yet this is not a participation in the sacraments as such . I think that only those who are above a certain level of spirituality can participate in the sacraments as such . For as long as those who are below this level have not reached it , whatever they may do , they can not be strictly said to belong to the Church . As far as I am concerned , I think I am below this level . That is why I said to you the other day that I consider myself to be unworthy of the sacraments . This idea does not come , as you imagined , from scrupulosity . It is due , on the one hand to a consciousness of very definite faults in the order of action and human relations , serious and even shameful faults as you would certainly agree , and moreover fairly frequent . On the other hand , and still more strongly , it is founded on a general sense of inadequacy . I am not saying this out of humility , for if I possessed the virtue of humility , the most beautiful of all the virtues perhaps , I should not be in this miserable state of inadequacy . To finish with what has to do with me , I say this . The kind of inhibition which keeps me outside the Church is due either to my state of imperfection , or to the fact that my vocation and God ’ s will are opposed to it . In the first case , I can not get rid of my inhibition by direct means but only indirectly , by becoming less imperfect , if I am helped by grace . To bring this about it is only necessary , on the one hand to avoid faults in the domain of natural things , and on the other to put ever more attention and love into my thought of God . If it is God ’ s will that I should enter the Church , he will impose this will upon me at the exact moment when I shall have come to deserve that he should so impose it . In the second case , if it is not his will that I should enter the Church , how could I enter it ? I know quite well what you have often repeated to me , that is to say that baptism is the common way of salvation—at least in Christian countries—and that there is absolutely no reason why I should have an exceptional one of my own . That is obvious . And yet supposing that in fact it should not be given me to take that step , what could I do ? If it were conceivable that in obeying God one should bring about one ’ s own damnation whilst in dis-obeying him one could be saved , I should still choose the way of obedience . It seems to me that the will of God is that I should not enter the Church at present . The reason for this I have told you already and it is still true . It is because the inhibition which holds me back is no less strongly to be felt in the moments of attention , love and prayer than at other times . And yet I was filled with a very great joy when you said the thoughts which I confided to you were not incompatible with membership of the Church , and that , in consequence , I was not outside it in spirit . I can not help still wondering whether in these days when so large a proportion of humanity is sunk in materialism , God does not want there to be some men and women who have given themselves to him and to Christ and who yet remain outside the Church . In any case , when I think of the act by which I should enter the Church as something concrete which might happen quite soon , nothing gives me more pain than the idea of separating myself from the immense and unfortunate multitude of un-believers . I have the essential need , and I think I can say the vocation , to move among men of every class and complexion , mixing with them and sharing their life and outlook , so far that is to say as conscience allows , merging into the crowd and disappearing among them , so that they show themselves as they are , putting off all disguises with me . It is because I long to know them , so as to love them just as they are . For if I do not love them as they are , it will not be they whom I love , and my love will be unreal . I do not speak of helping them , because as far as that goes I am unfortunately quite incapable of doing anything as yet . I do not think that in any case I should ever enter a religious order , because that would separate me from ordinary people by a habit . There are some human beings for whom such a separation has no serious disadvantages , because they are already separated from ordinary folk by their natural purity of soul . As for me , on the contrary , as I think I told you , I have the germ of all possible crimes , or nearly all , within me . I became aware of this in the course of a journey , in circumstances which I have described to you . The crimes horrified me , but they did not surprise me ; I felt the possibility of them with-in myself ; it was actually because I felt this possibility in myself that they filled me with such horror . This natural disposition is dangerous and very painful , but , like every variety of natural disposition , it can be put to good purpose if one knows how to make the right use of it with the help of grace . It is the sign of a vocation , the vocation to remain in a sense anonymous , ever ready to be mixed into the paste of common humanity . Now at the present time , the state of men ’ s minds is such that there is a more clearly marked barrier , a wider gulf between a practising Catholic and an unbeliever than between a religious and a layman . I know quite well that Christ said ‘ Whoever shall deny ( i.e. , disown ) me before men , him will I also deny before my Father who is in Heaven. ’ 1 But disowning Christ does not perhaps mean for everyone and in all cases not belonging to the Church . For some it may only mean not carrying out Christ ’ s precepts , not shedding abroad his spirit , not honouring his name when occasion arises , not being ready to die out of loyalty to him . I owe you the truth , at the risk of shocking you , and it gives me the greatest pain to shock you . I love God , Christ and the Catholic faith as much as it is possible for so miserably inadequate a creature to love them . I love the Saints through their writings , and what is told of their lives—apart from some whom it is impossible for me to love fully or to consider as saints . I love the six or seven Catholics of genuine spirituality whom chance has led me to meet in the course of my life . I love the Catholic liturgy , hymns , architecture , rites and ceremonies . But I have not the slightest love for the Church in the strict sense of the word , apart from its relation to all these things that I do love . I am capable of sympathising with those who have this love , but I do not feel it . I am well aware that all the Saints felt it . But then they were nearly all born and brought up in the Church . Anyhow , one can not make oneself love . All that I can say is that if such a love constitutes a condition of spiritual progress , which I am unaware of , or if it is part of my vocation , I desire that it may one day be granted to me . It may well be that some of the thoughts I have just confided to you are illusory and defective . In a sense this matters little to me ; I do not want to go on examining any more , for at the end of all these reflections I have reached a conclusion which is the pure and simple resolution to stop thinking about the question of my eventual entry into the Church . It is very possible that after having passed weeks , months or years without thinking about it all , one day I shall suddenly feel an irresistible impulse to ask immediately for baptism and I shall run to ask for it . For the action of grace in our hearts is secret and silent . It may also be that my life will come to an end before I have ever felt this impulse . But one thing is absolutely certain . It is that if one day it comes about that I love God enough to deserve the grace of baptism , I shall receive this grace on that very day , infallibly , in the form which God wills , either by means of baptism in the strict sense of the word or in some other manner . In that case why should I have any anxiety ? It is not my business to think about myself . My business is to think about God . It is for God to think about me . This is a very long letter . Once again I shall have taken up much more of your time than I ought . I beg you to forgive me . My excuse is that by writing this I have reached a conclusion , for the time being at any rate . Do believe how truly grateful I am . SIMONE WEIL 1 St. Matt . x , 33 . Simone Weil evidently used a Greek edition of the New Testament , and made her own translations of the quoted texts . It was the decision of the publishers and not of the translator to use in most cases the Authorised Version in the English edition of Simone Weil ’ s works . LETTER II ( SAME SUBJECT ) My dear Father , This is a postscript to the letter which I told you was provisionally a conclusion . I hope for your sake that it will be the only one . I am very much afraid of boring you . But if I do you must blame yourself . It is not my fault if I believe I owe it to you to keep you informed of what I am thinking . The obstacles of an intellectual order , which until lately stopped me on the threshold of the Church , might if necessary be considered as eliminated , since you do not refuse to accept me just as I am . Yet there are still obstacles which remain . After thoroughly considering everything , I think this is what they come to . What frightens me is the Church as a social structure . Not only on account of its blemishes , but from the very fact that it is something social . It is not that I am of a very individualistic temperament . I am afraid for the opposite reason . I am aware of very strong gregarious tendencies in myself . My natural disposition is to be very easily influenced , too much influenced—and above all by anything collective . I know that if at this moment I had before me a group of twenty young Germans singing Nazi songs in chorus , a part of my soul would instantly become Nazi . That is a very great weakness , but that is how I am . I think that it is useless to fight directly against natural weaknesses . One has to force oneself to act as though one did not have them in circumstances where a duty makes it imperative ; and in the ordinary course of life one has to know these weaknesses , prudently take them into account , and strive to turn them to good purpose ; for they are all capable of being put to some good purpose . I am afraid of the Church patriotism which exists in Catholic circles . By patriotism I mean the feeling one has for a terrestrial country . I am afraid of it because I fear to catch it . It is not that the Church appears to me to be unworthy of inspiring such a feeling . It is because I do not want any feeling of such a kind in myself . The word want is not accurate . I know , I feel quite certain , that any feeling of this kind , whatever its object , would be fatal for me . There were some saints who approved of the Crusades or the Inquisition . I can not help thinking that they were in the wrong . I can not go against the light of conscience . If I think that on this point I see more clearly than they did , I who am so far below them , I must admit that in this matter they were blinded by something very powerful . This something was the Church seen as a social structure . If this social structure did them harm , what harm would it not do me , who am particularly susceptible to social influences and who am almost infinitely more feeble than they were ? Nothing has ever been said or written which goes so far as the devil ’ s words to Christ in Saint Luke concerning the kingdoms of the world . ‘ All this power will I give thee and the glory of it , for that is delivered unto me and to whomsoever I will I give it. ’ It follows from this that the social is irremediably the domain of the devil . The flesh impels us to say me and the devil impels us to say us ; or else to say like the dictators I with a collective signification . And , in conformity with his particular mission , the devil manufactures a false imitation of what is divine , an ersatz divinity . By social I do not mean everything connected with citizenship , but only collective emotions . I am well aware that the Church must inevitably be a social structure ; otherwise it would not exist . But in so far as it is a social structure , it belongs to the Prince of this World . It is because it is an organ for the preservation and transmission of truth that there is an extreme danger for those who , like me , are excessively open to social influences . For in this way what is purest and what is most defiling look very much the same , and , confused under the same words , make an almost unde-composable mixture . There is a Catholic circle ready to give an eager welcome to whoever enters it . Well , I do not want to be adopted into a circle , to live among people who say ‘ we ’ and to be part of an ‘ us , ’ to find I am ‘ at home ’ in any human milieu whatever it may be . In saying I do not want this , I am expressing myself badly , for I should like it very much ; I should find it all delightful . But I feel that it is not permissible for me . I feel that it is necessary and ordained that I should be alone , a stranger and an exile in relation to every human circle without exception . This may seem to contradict what I wrote to you about my need to be merged into any human circle in which I moved . To be lost to view in it is not to form part of it , and my capacity to mix with all of them implies that I belong to none . I do not know if I have succeeded in making you understand these almost inexpressible things . Such considerations have to do with this world and seem miserably poor when one turns to the supernatural character of the sacraments . But it is precisely the impure mixture in me of supernatural and evil that I fear . The relation of hunger to food is far less complete , to be sure , but just as real as is that of the act of eating . It is perhaps not inconceivable that in a being with certain natural propensities , a particular temperament , a given past , a certain vocation and so on , the desire for and deprivation of the sacraments might constitute a contact which was more pure than actual participation . I do not in the least know whether it is like that with me or not . I am well aware that it would be something exceptional , and it seems as though there were always a crazy presumption in claiming that one might be an exception . But the exceptional character may very well be due not to superiority but to inferiority in comparison with others . I think that would apply to me . Whatever the cause may be , as I have told you , I do not believe I am actually capable in any case of a real contact with the sacraments , but only of the intuition that such a contact is possible . All the more is it impossible for me really to know at present what kind of relationship with them is most suitable for me . There are times when I am tempted to put myself entirely in your hands and to ask you to decide for me . But , when all is said and done , I can not do this . I have not the right . I think that with very important things we do not overcome our obstacles . We look at them fixedly for as long as is necessary until , if they are due to the powers of illusion , they disappear . What I call an obstacle is quite a different thing from the kind of inertia which we have to overcome at every step we take in the direction of what is good . I have experience of this inertia . Obstacles are quite another matter . If we want to get over them before they have disappeared , we are in danger of those phenomena of compensation , referred to I think by the Gospel passage about the man from whom one devil had gone out and into whom seven others entered forthwith . The mere thought that , supposing I were baptised with any sentiments other than those which are fitting , I should ever come to have even a single instant or a single inward movement of regret , fills me with horror . Even if I were certain that baptism was the absolute condition of salvation , I would not run this risk , even to save my soul . I would choose to abstain from it so long as I did not have the conviction that I was not running this risk . One only has such a conviction when one thinks that one is acting in obedience . Only obedience is in-vulnerable for all time . If I had my eternal salvation placed in front of me on this table , and if I only had to stretch out my hand to take it , I would not put out my hand so long as I had not received the order to do so . At least that is what I like to think . And if instead of my own it were the eternal salvation of all human beings , past , present and to come , I know I ought to do the same thing . In that case I should mind very much . But if I alone were concerned I almost think I should not greatly mind . For I want nothing else but obedience , obedience itself , in its totality , that is to say even to the Cross . Yet I have no right to speak thus . In speaking thus I lie . For if I desired this I should obtain it ; and in fact it continually comes about that I put off for days and days the fulfilment of obligations which are obvious duties , which I know to be such , easy and simple to carry out in themselves and important in their possible consequences for others . But it would be too long and uninteresting to tell you about my miserable faults . And it would probably not serve any useful purpose . Except that at all events it would prevent you from making any mistake about me . Do believe in my very real gratitude . I think you know that this is not just a formula . SIMONE WEIL LETTER III ABOUT HER DEPARTURE 16th April 1942 Dear Father , Unless anything unexpected happens we shall be seeing each other in a week for the last time . I am to leave at the end of the month . If you could arrange things so that we could have time to talk at our leisure of that choice of texts it would be a good thing . But I suppose that it will not be possible . I do not in the least wish to leave . I shall leave with anguish . The calculations as to probabilities which decide me are so uncertain that they scarcely give me any support . The thought which guides me , and which has been in my mind for years , so that I dare not dismiss it although there is little chance of carrying it out , is fairly close to the project with which you had the great generosity to help me a few months ago , and which did not succeed . At bottom , the principle reason which is sending me off is that , given the rate at which things are now moving and the conjunction of circumstances , it seems as though it is the decision to stay which would be an act of personal will on my part . And my greatest desire is to lose not only all will but all personal being . It seems to me as though something were telling me to go . As I am perfectly sure that this is not just emotion , I am abandoning myself to it . I hope that this abandonment , even if I am mistaken , will finally bring me to the haven . What I call the haven , as you know , is the Cross . If it can not be given me to deserveone day to share the Cross of Christ , at least may I share that of the good thief . Of all the beings other than Christ of whom the Gospel tells us , the good thief is by far the one I most envy . To have been at the side of Christ and in the same state during the crucifixion seems to me a far more enviable privilege than to be at the right hand of his glory . Although the time is near , I have not yet made my decision quite irrevocably . Therefore , if , by chance , you have any advice to give me , now is the moment . But do not think about it specially . You have a great many far more important things to think about . Once I have gone , it seems to me very improbable that circumstances will allow me to see you again one day . As to eventual meetings in another world , you know that I do not picture things to myself in that way . But that does not matter very much . It is enough for my friendship with you that you exist . I shall not be able to help thinking with keen anguish of all those whom I shall have left in France and of you in particular . But that also does not matter . I think that you are among those to whom , whatever happens , no real harm can ever come . Distance will not prevent my debt to you from increasing day by day , as time passes . For it will not prevent me from thinking of you . And it is impossible to think of you without thinking of God . Do believe in my filial friendship . SIMONE WEIL P.S.—You know that for me there is no question in this departure of an escape from suffering and danger . My anguish comes precisely from the fear that in spite of myself , and un-wittingly , by going I shall be doing what I want above everything else not to do—that is to say running away . Up till now we have lived here very peacefully . If this peace is destroyed just after I have gone away , it will be frightful for me . If I were sure it was going to be like that , I think that I should stay . If you know anything which might throw any light on what is going to happen , I count on you to tell me . LETTERS OF FAREWELL LETTER IV SPIRITUAL AUTOBIOGRAPHY P.S.—To be read first . This letter is fearfully long—but as there is no question of an answer—especially as I shall doubtless have gone before it reaches you—you have years ahead of you in which to read it if you care to . Read it all the same , one day or another . From Marseilles , about 15th May Father , Before leaving I want to speak to you again , it may be the last time perhaps , for over there I shall probably send you only my news from time to time just so as to have yours . I told you that I owed you an enormous debt . I want to try to tell you exactly what it consists of . I think that if you could really understand what my spiritual state is you would not be at all sorry that you did not lead me to baptism . But I do not know if it is possible for you to understand this . You neither brought me the Christian inspiration nor did you bring me to Christ ; for when I met you there was no longer any need ; it had been done without the intervention of any human being . If it had been otherwise , if I had not already been won , not only implicitly but consciously , you would have given me nothing , because I should have received nothing from you . My friendship for you would have been a reason for me to refuse your message , for I should have been afraid of the possibilities of error and illusion which human influence in the divine order is likely to involve . I may say that never at any moment in my life have I ‘ sought for God ’ . For this reason , which is probably too subjective , I do not like this expression and it strikes me as false . As soon as I reached adolescence I saw the problem of God as a problem of which the data could not be obtained here below , and I decided that the only way of being sure not to reach a wrong solution , which seemed to me the greatest possible evil , was to leave it alone . So I left it alone . I neither affirmed nor denied anything . It seemed to me useless to solve the problem , for I thought that being in this world , our business was to adopt the best attitude with regard to the problems of this world , and that such an attitude did not depend upon the solution of the problem of God . This held good as far as I was concerned at any rate , for I never hesitated in my choice of an attitude ; I always adopted the Christian attitude as the only possible one . I might say that I was born , I grew up and I always remained within the Christian inspiration . Whilst the very name of God had no part in my thoughts , with regard to the problems of this world and this life I shared the Christian conception in an explicit and rigorous manner , with the most specific notions it involves . Some of these notions have been part of my outlook for as far back as I can remember . With others I know the time and manner of their coming and the form under which they imposed themselves upon me . For instance I never allowed myself to think of a future state , but I always believed that the instant of death is the centre and object of life . I used to think that , for those who live as they should , it is the instant when , for an infinitesimal fraction of time , pure truth , naked , certain and eternal enters the soul . I may say that I never desired any other good for myself . I thought that the life which leads to this good is not only defined by a code of morals common to all , but that for each one it consists of a succession of acts and events which are strictly personal to him , and so essential that he who leaves them on one side never reaches the goal . The notion of vocation was like this for me . I saw the carrying out of a vocation differed from the actions dictated by reason or inclination in that it was due to an impulse of an essentially and manifestly different order ; and not to follow such an impulse when it made itself felt , even if it demanded impossibilities , seemed to me the greatest of all ills . Hence my conception of obedience ; and I put this conception to the test when I entered the factory and stayed on there , even when I was in that state of intense and uninterrupted misery about which I recently told you . The most beautiful life possible has always seemed to me to be one where everything is determined , either by the pressure of circumstances or by impulses such as I have just mentioned and where there is never any room for choice . At fourteen I fell into one of those fits of bottomless despair which come with adolescence , and I seriously thought of dying because of the mediocrity of my natural faculties . The exceptional gifts of my brother , who had a childhood and youth comparable to those of Pascal , brought my own inferiority home to me . I did not mind having no visible successes , but what did grieve me was the idea of being excluded from that transcendent kingdom to which only the truly great have access and wherein truth abides . I preferred to die rather than live without that truth . After months of inward darkness , I suddenly had the everlasting conviction that no matter what human being , even though practically devoid of natural faculties , can penetrate to the kingdom of truth reserved for genius , if only he longs for truth and perpetually concentrates all his attention upon its attainment . He thus becomes a genius too , even though for lack of talent his genius can not be visible from outside . Later on , when the strain of headaches caused the feeble faculties I possess to be invaded by a paralysis which I was quick to imagine was probably incurable , the same conviction led me to persevere for ten years in an effort of concentrated attention which was practically unsupported by any hope of results . Under the name of truth I also included beauty , virtue and every kind of goodness , so that for me it was a question of a conception of the relationship between grace and desire . The conviction which had come to me was that when one hungers for bread one does not receive stones . But at that time I had not read the Gospel . Just as I was certain that desire has in itself an efficacy in the realm of spiritual goodness whatever its form , I thought it was also possible that it might not be effective in any other realm . As for the spirit of poverty , I do not remember any moment when it was not in me , although only to that unhappily small extent which is compatible with my imperfection . I fell in love with Saint Francis of Assisi as soon as I came to know about him . I always believed and hoped that one day Fate would force upon me the condition of a vagabond and a beggar which he embraced freely . Actually I felt the same way about prison . From my earliest childhood I always had also the Christian idea of love for one ’ s neighbour , to which I gave the name of justice ; a name it bears in many passages of the Gospel and which is so beautiful . You know that on this point I have failed seriously several times . The duty of acceptance in all that concerns the will of God , whatever it may be , was impressed upon my mind as the first and most necessary of all duties from the time when I found it set down in Marcus Aurelius under the form of the amor fati of the Stoics . I saw it as a duty we can not fail in without dishonouring ourselves . The idea of purity , with all that this word can imply for a Christian , took possession of me at the age of sixteen , after a period of several months during which I had been going through the emotional unrest natural in adolescence . This idea came to me when I was contemplating a mountain landscape and little by little it was imposed upon me in an irresistible manner . Of course I knew quite well that my conception of life was Christian . That is why it never occurred to me that I could enter the Christian community . I had the idea that I was born inside . But to add dogma to this conception of life , without being forced to do so by indisputable evidence , would have seemed to me like a lack of honesty . I should even have thought I was lacking in honesty had I considered the question of the truth of dogma as a problem for myself , or even had I simply desired to reach a conclusion on this subject . I have an extremely severe standard for intellectual honesty , so severe that I never met anyone who did not seem to fall short of it in more than one respect ; and I am always afraid of failing in it myself . Keeping away from dogma in this way , I was prevented by a sort of shame from going into churches , though all the same I like being in them . Nevertheless I had three contacts with Catholicism which really counted . After my year in the factory , before going back to teaching , I had been taken by my parents to Portugal , and while there I left them to go alone to a little village . I was , as it were , in pieces , soul and body . That contact with affliction1 had killed my youth . Until then I had not had any experience of affliction , unless we count my own , which , as it was my own , seemed to me , to have little importance , and which moreover was only a partial affliction , being biological and not social . I knew quite well that there was a great deal of affliction in the world , I was obsessed with the idea , but I had not had prolonged and first-hand experience of it . As I worked in the factory , indistinguishable to all eyes , including my own , from the anonymous mass , the affliction of others entered into my flesh and my soul . Nothing separated me from it , for I had really forgotten my past and I looked forward to no future , finding it difficult to imagine the possibility of surviving all the fatigue . What I went through there marked me in so lasting a manner that still today when any human being , whoever he may be and in whatever circumstances , speaks to me without brutality , I can not help having the impression that there must be a mistake and that unfortunately the mistake will in all probability disappear . There I received for ever the mark of a slave , like the branding of the red-hot iron which the Romans put on the foreheads of their most despised slaves . Since then I have always regarded myself as a slave . In this state of mind then , and in a wretched condition physically , I entered the little Portuguese village , which , alas , was very wretched too , on the very day of its patronal festival . I was alone . It was the evening and there was a full moon . It was by the sea . The wives of the fishermen were going in procession to make a tour of all the ships , carrying candles and singing what must certainly be very ancient hymns of a heart-rending sadness . Nothing can give any idea of it . I have never heard anything so poignant unless it were the song of the boatmen on the Volga . There the conviction was suddenly borne in upon me that Christianity is pre-eminently the religion of slaves , that slaves can not help belonging to it , and I among others . In 1937 I had two marvellous days at Assisi . There , alone in the little XIIth Century Romanesque chapel of Santa Maria degli Angeli , an incomparable marvel of purity where Saint Francis often used to pray , something stronger than I was compelled me for the first time in my life to go down on my knees . In 1938 I spent ten days at Solesmes , from Palm Sunday to Easter Tuesday , following all the liturgical services . I was suffering from splitting headaches ; each sound hurt me like a blow ; by an extreme effort of concentration I was able to rise above this wretched flesh , to leave it to suffer by itself , heaped up in a corner , and to find a pure and perfect joy in the un-imaginable beauty of the chanting and the words . This experience enabled me by analogy to get a better understanding of the possibility of loving divine love in the midst of affliction . It goes without saying that in the course of these services the thought of the Passion of Christ entered into my being once and for all . There was a young English Catholic there from whom I gained my first idea of the supernatural power of the Sacraments because of the truly angelic radiance with which he seemed to be clothed after going to communion . Chance—for I always prefer saying chance rather than Providence—made of him a messenger to me . For he told me of the existence of those English poets of the XVIIth century who are named metaphysical . In reading them later on , I discovered the poem of which I read you what is unfortunately a very inadequate translation . It is called Love.1 I learnt it by heart . Often , at the culminating point of a violent headache , I make myself say it over , concentrating all my attention upon it and clinging with all my soul to the tenderness it enshrines . I used to think I was merely reciting it as a beautiful poem , but without my knowing it the recitation had the virtue of a prayer . It was during one of these recitations that , as I told you , Christ himself came down and took possession of me . In my arguments about the insolubility of the problem of God I had never foreseen the possibility of that , of a real contact , person to person , here below , between a human being and God . I had vaguely heard tell of things of this kind , but I had never believed in them . In the Fioretti the accounts of apparitions rather put me off if anything , like the miracles in the Gospel . Moreover , in this sudden possession of me by Christ , neither my senses nor my imagination had any part ; I only felt in the midst of my suffering the presence of a love , like that which one can read in the smile on a beloved face . I had never read any mystical works because I had never felt any call to read them . In reading as in other things I have always striven to practice obedience . There is nothing more favourable to intellectual progress , for as far as possible I only read what I am hungry for , at the moment when I have an appetite for it , and then I do not read , I eat . God in his mercy had prevented me from reading the mystics , so that it should be evident to me that I had not invented this absolutely unexpected contact . Yet I still half refused , not my love but my intelligence . For it seemed to me certain , and I still think so today , that one can never wrestle enough with God if one does so out of pure regard for the truth . Christ likes us to prefer truth to him because , before being Christ , he is truth . If one turns aside from him to go towards the truth , one will not go far before falling into his arms . After this I came to feel that Plato was a mystic , that all the Iliad is bathed in Christian light , and that Dionysus and Osiris are in a certain sense Christ himself ; and my love was thereby re-doubled . I never wondered whether Jesus was or was not the incarnation of God ; but in fact I was incapable of thinking of him without thinking of him as God . In the spring of 1940 I read the Bhagavat-Gita . Strange to say it was in reading those marvellous words , words with such a Christian sound , put into the mouth . of an incarnation of God , that I came to feel strongly that we owe an allegiance to religious truth . which is quite different from the admiration we accord to a beautiful poem , it is something far more categorical . Yet I did not believe it to be possible for me to consider the question of baptism . I felt that I could not honestly give up my opinions concerning the non-Christian religions and con-cerning Israel—and as a matter of fact time and meditation have only served to strengthen them—and I thought that this constituted an absolute obstacle . I did not imagine it as possible that a priest could even dream of granting me baptism . If I had not met you , I should never have considered the problem of baptism as a practical problem . During all this time of spiritual progress I had never prayed . I was afraid of the power of suggestion that is in prayer—the very power for which Pascal recommends it . Pascal ’ s method seems to me one of the worst for attaining faith . Contact with you was not able to persuade me to pray . On the contrary I thought the danger was all the greater , since I also had to beware of the power of suggestion in my friendship with you . At the same time I found it very difficult not to pray and not to tell you so . Moreover I knew I could not tell you without completely misleading you about myself . At that time I should not have been able to make you understand . Until last September I had never once prayed in all my life , at least not in the literal sense of the word . I had never said any words to God , either out loud or mentally . I had never pronounced a liturgical prayer . I had occasionally recited the Salve Regina , but only as a beautiful poem . Last summer , doing Greek with T… , I went through the ‘ Our Father ’ word for word in Greek . We promised each other to learn it by heart . I do not think he ever did so , but some weeks later , as I was turning over the pages of the Gospel , I said to myself that since I had promised to do this thing and it was good , I ought to do it . I did it . The infinite sweetness of this Greek text so took hold of me that for several days I could not stop myself from saying it over all the time . A week afterwards I began the vine-harvest . I recited the ‘ Our Father ’ in Greek every day before work , and I repeated it very often in the vineyard . Since that time I have made a practice of saying it through once each morning with absolute attention . If during the recitation my attention wanders or goes to sleep , in the minutest degree , I begin again until I have once succeeded in going through it with absolutely pure attention . Sometimes it comes about that I say it again out of sheer pleasure , but I only do it if I really feel the impulse . The effect of this practice is extraordinary and surprises me every time , for , although I experience it each day , it exceeds my expectation at each repetition . At times the very first words tear my thoughts from my body and transport it to a place outside space where there is neither perspective nor point of view . The infinity of the ordinary expanses of perception is replaced by an infinity to the second or sometimes the third degree . At the same time , filling every part of this infinity of infinity , there is silence , a silence which is not an absence of sound but which is the object of a positive sensation , more positive than that of sound . Noises , if there are any , only reach me after crossing this silence . Sometimes , also , during this recitation or at other moments , Christ is present with me in person , but his presence is infinitely more real , more moving , more clear than on that first occasion when he took possession of me . I should never have been able to take it upon myself to tell you all this had it not been for the fact that I am going away . And as I am going more or less with the idea of probable death , I do not believe that I have the right to keep it to myself . For after all , the whole of this matter is not a question concerning me myself . It concerns God . I am really nothing in it all . If one could imagine any possibility of error in God , I should think that it had all happened to me by mistake . But perhaps God likes to use cast-away objects , waste , rejects . After all , should the bread of the host be mouldy , it would become the Body of Christ just the same after the priest had consecrated it . Only it can not refuse , whilst we can disobey . It sometimes seems to that when I am treated in so merciful a way , every sin on my part must be a mortal sin . And I am constantly committing them . I have told you that you are like a father and brother at the same time to me . But these words only express an analogy . Perhaps at bottom they only correspond to a feeling of affection , of gratitude and admiration . For as to the spiritual direction of my soul , I think that God himself has taken it in hand from the start and still looks after it . That does not prevent me from owing you the greatest debt of gratitude that I could ever have incurred towards any human being . This is exactly what it consists of . First you once said to me at the beginning of our relationship some words which went to the bottom of my soul . You said : ‘ Be very careful , because if you should pass over something important through your own fault it would be a pity. ’ That made me see intellectual honesty in a new light . Till then I had only thought of it as opposed to faith ; your words made me think that perhaps , without my knowing it , there were in me obstacles to the faith which were not pure , such as prejudices , habits . I felt that after having said to myself for so many years simply : ‘ Perhaps all that is not true , ’ I ought , without ceasing to say it—I still take care to say it very often now—to join it to the opposite formula , namely : ‘ Perhaps all that is true , ’ and to make them alternate . At the same time , in making the problem of baptism a practical problem for me , you have forced me to face the whole question of the faith , dogma and the sacraments , obliging me to consider them closely and at length with the fullest possible attention , making me see them as things towards which I have obligations that I have to discern and perform . I should never have done this otherwise and it is indispensable for me to do it . But the greatest blessing you have brought me is of another order . In gaining my friendship by your charity ( which I have never met anything to equal ) , you have provided me with a source of the most compelling and pure inspiration that is to be found among human things . For nothing among human things has such power to keep our gaze fixed ever more intensely upon God , than friendship for the friends of God . Nothing better enables me to measure the breadth of your charity than the fact that you bore with me for so long and with such gentleness . I may seem to be joking , but that is not the case . It is true that you have not the same motives as I have myself ( those about which I wrote to you the other day ) , for feeling hatred and repulsion towards me . But all the same I feel that your patience with me can only spring from a super-natural generosity . I have not been able to help causing you the greatest disappointment it was in my power to cause you . But up to now , although I have often asked myself the question during prayer , during Mass , or in the light of the radiancy which remains in the soul after Mass , I have never once had , even for a moment , the feeling that God wants me to be in the Church . I have never even once had a feeling of uncertainty . I think that at the present time we can finally conclude that he does not want me in the Church . Do not have any regrets about it . He does not want it so far at least . But unless I am mistaken I should say that it is his will that I should stay outside for the future too , except perhaps at the moment of death . Yet I am always ready to obey any order , whatever it may be . I should joyfully obey the order to go to the very centre of hell and to remain there eternally . I do not mean , of course , that I have a preference for orders of this nature . I am not perverse like that . Christianity should contain all vocations without exception since it is catholic . In consequence the Church should also . But in my eyes Christianity is catholic by right but not in fact . So many things are outside it , so many things that I love and do not want to give up , so many things that God loves , otherwise they would not be in existence . All the immense stretches of past centuries , except the last twenty are among them ; all the countries inhabited by coloured races ; all secular life in the white peoples ’ countries ; in the history of these countries , all the traditions banned as heretical , those of the Manicheans , and Albigerises for instance ; all those things resulting from the Renaissance , too often degraded but not quite without value . Christianity being catholic by right but not in fact , I regard it as legitimate on my part to be a member of the Church by right but not in fact , not only for a time , but for my whole life if need be . But it is not merely legitimate . So long as God does not give me the certainty that he is ordering me to do anything else , I think it is my duty . I think , and so do you , that our obligation for the next two or three years , an obligation so strict that we can scarcely fail in it without treason , is to show the public the possibility of a truly incarnated Christianity . In all the history now known there has never been a period in which souls have been in such peril as they are today in every part of the globe . The bronze serpent must be lifted up again so that whoever raises his eyes to it may be saved . But everything is so closely bound up together that Christianity can not be really incarnated unless it is catholic in the sense that I have just defined . How could it circulate through the flesh of all the nations of Europe if it did not contain absolutely everything in itself ? Except of course falsehood . But in everything that exists there is most of the time more truth than falsehood . Having so intense and so painful a sense of this urgency , I should betray the truth , that is to say the aspect of truth that I see , if I left the point , where I have been since my birth , at the intersection of Christianity and everything that is not Christianity . I have always remained at this exact point , on the threshold of the Church , without moving , quite still ( it is so much more beautiful a word that patientia ! ) ; only now my heart has been transported , for ever , I hope , into the Blessed Sacrament exposed on the altar . You see that I am very far from the thoughts that H… , with the best of intentions , attributed to me . I am far also from being worried in any way . If I am sad , it comes primarily from the permanent sadness which destiny has imprinted for ever upon my emotions , where the greatest and purest joys can only be superimposed and that at the price of a great effort of attention . It comes also from my miserable and continual sins ; and from all the calamities of our time and of all those of all the past centuries . I think that you should understand why I have always resisted you ; if in spite of being a priest you can admit that a genuine vocation might prevent anyone from entering the church . Otherwise a barrier of incomprehension will remain between us , whether the error is on my part or on yours . This would grieve me from the point of view of my friendship for you , because in that case the result of all these efforts and desires , called forth by your charity towards me , would be a disappointment for you . Moreover although it is not my fault , I should not be able to help feeling guilty of ingratitude . For , I repeat , my debt to you is beyond all measure . I should like to draw your attention to one point . It is that there is an absolutely insurmountable obstacle to the incarnation of Christianity . It is the use of the two little words anathema sit . It is not their existence , but the way they have been cmployed up till now . It is that also which prevents me from crossing the threshold of the Church . I remain beside all those things which can not enter the Church , the universal repository , on account of those two little words . I remain beside them all the more because my own intelligence is numbered among them . The incarnation of Christianity implies a harmonious solution of the problem of the relations between the individual and the collective . Harmony in the Pythagorean sense ; the just balance of contraries . This solution is precisely what men are thirsting for today . The position of the intelligence is the key to this harmony , because the intelligence is a specifically and rigorously individual thing . This harmony exists wherever the intelligence , remaining in its place , can be exercised without hindrance and can reach the complete fulfilment of its function . That is what Saint Thomas says admirably of all the parts of the soul of Christ , with reference to his sensitiveness to pain during the crucifixion . The special function of the intelligence requires total liberty , implying the right to deny everything , and allowing of no domination . Wherever it usurps control there is an excess of individualism . Wherever it is hampered or uneasy there is an oppressive collectivism , or several of them . The Church and the State should punish it , each one in its own way , when it advocates actions of which they disapprove . When it remains in the region of purely theoretical speculation they still have the duty , should occasion arise , to put the public on their guard , by every effective means , against the danger of a practical influence which certain speculations might have upon the conduct of life . But whatever these theoretical speculations may be , the Church and the State have no right either to try to stifle them , or to inflict any penalty material or moral upon their authors . Notably , they should not be deprived of the Sacraments if they desire them . For , whatever they may have said , even if they have publicly denied the existence of God , they may not have committed any sin . In such a case the Church should declare that they are in error , but it should not demand of them anything whatever in the way of a disavowal of what they have said , nor should it deprive them of the Bread of Life . A collective body is the guardian of dogma ; and dogma is an object of contemplation for love , faith and intelligence , three strictly individual faculties . Hence , almost since the beginning , the individual has been ill at ease in Christianity , and this uneasiness has been notably one of the intelligence . This can not be denied . Christ himself who is Truth itself , when he was speaking before an assembly such as a council , did not address it in the same language as that he used in an intimate conversation with his well-beloved friend , and no doubt before the Pharisees he might easily have been accused of contradiction and error . For by one of those laws of nature which God himself respects , since he has willed them from all eternity , there are two languages which are quite distinct although made up of the same words ; there is the collective language and there is the individual one . The Comforter whom Christ sends us , the Spirit of truth , speaks one or other of these languages , whichever circumstances demand , and by a necessity of their nature there is not agreement between them . When genuine friends of God—such as was Eckhart to my way of thinking—repeat words they have heard in secret amidst the silence of the union of love , and these words are in disagreement with the teaching of the Church , it is simply that the language of the market place is not that of the nuptial chamber . Everybody knows that really intimate conversation is only possible between two or three . As soon as there are six or seven , collective language begins to dominate . That is why it is a complete misinterpretation to apply to the Church the words ‘ Wheresoever two or three are gathered together in my name , there am I in the midst of them. ’ Christ did not say two hundred , or fifty , or ten . He said two or three . He said precisely that he always forms the third in the intimacy of the tête-à-tête . Christ made promises to the Church , but none of these promises has the force of the expression ‘ Thy Father who seeth in secret. ’ The word of God is the secret word . He who has not heard this word , even if he adheres to all the dogmas taught by the Church , has no contact with truth . The function of the Church as the collective keeper of dogma is indispensable . She has the right and the duty to punish those who make a clear attack upon her within the specific range of this function , by depriving them of the sacraments . Thus , although I know practically nothing of this business , I incline to think provisionally that she was right to punish Luther . But she is guilty of an abuse of power when she claims to force love and intelligence to model their language upon her own . This abuse of power is not of God . It comes from the natural tendency of every form of collectivism , without exception , to abuse power . The image of the Mystical Body of Christ is very attractive . But I consider the importance given to this image today as one of the most serious signs of our degeneration . For our true dignity is not to be parts of a body , even though it be a mystical one , even though it be that of Christ . It consists in this , that in the state of perfection , which is the vocation of each one of us , we no longer live in ourselves , but Christ lives in us ; so that through our perfection Christ in his integrity and in his indivisible unity , becomes in a sense each one of us , as he is completely in each host . The hosts are not a part of his body . This present day importance of the image of the Mystical Body shows how wretchedly susceptible Christians are to outside influences . Undoubtedly there is real intoxication in being a member of the Mystical Body of Christ . But today a great many other mystical bodies , which have not Christ for their head , produce an intoxication in their members which to my way of thinking is of the same order . As long as it is through obedience , I find sweetness in my deprivation of the joy of membership in the Mystical Body of Christ . For if God is willing to help me , I may thus bear witness that without this joy one can nevertheless be faithful to Christ unto death . Social enthusiasms have such power today , they raise people so effectively to the supreme degree of heroism in suffering and death , that I think it is as well that a few sheep should remain outside the fold in order to bear witness that the love of Christ is essentially something different . The Church today defends the cause of the indefeasible rights of the individual against collective oppression , of liberty of thought against tyranny . But these are causes which are readily embraced by those who find themselves momentarily to be the least strong . It is their only way of perhaps one day becoming the strongest . That is well known . You may perhaps be offended by this idea . You are not the Church . During the periods of the most atrocious abuse of power committed by the Church , there must have been some priests like you among the others . Your good faith is not a guarantee , even were it shared by all your Order . You can not foresee what turn things may take . In order that the present attitude of the Church should be effective and that she should really penetrate like a wedge into social existence , she would have to say openly that she had changed or wished to change . Otherwise who could take her seriously when they remembered the Inquisition . My friendship for you , which I extend through you to all your Order , makes it very painful for me to bring this up . But it existed . After the fall of the Roman Empire , which had been totalitarian , it was the Church which was the first to establish a rough sort of totalitarianism in Europe in the XIIIth century , after the war with the Albigenses . This tree bore much fruit . And the motive power of this totalitarianism was the use of those two little words : anathema sit . It was moreover by a judicious transposirion of this use that all the parties which in our own day have founded totalitarian regimes were shaped . This is a point of history which I have specially studied . I must give you the impression of a Luciferian pride in speaking thus of a great many matters which are too high for me and about which I have no right to understand anything . It is not my fault . Ideas come and settle in my mind by mistake , then , realising their mistake , they absolutely insist on coming out . I do not know where they come from , nor what they are worth , but , whatever the risk , I do not think I have the right to prevent this operation . Goodbye , I wish you all possible good things except the Cross ; for I do not love my neighbour as myself , you particularly , as you have noticed . But Christ granted to his well-beloved disciple , and probably to all that disciple ’ s spiritual lineage , to come to him not through degradation , defilement and distress , but in uninterrupted joy , purity and sweetness . That is why I can allow myself to wish that even if one day you have the honour of dying a violent death for Our Lord , it may be with joy and without any anguish ; also that only three of the beatitudes ( mites , mundo corde , pacifici ) will apply to you . All the others involve more or less of suffering . This wish is not due only to the frailty of human friendship . For , with no matter what human being , taken individually , I always find reasons for concluding that sorrow and misfortune do not suit him ; either because he seems too mediocre for anything so great , or on the contrary , too precious to be destroyed . One can not fail more seriously in the second of the two essential commandments . And as to the first , I fail to observe that in a still more horrible manner , for every time that I think of the crucifixion of Christ , I commit the sin of envy . Believe more than ever and for ever in my filial and tenderly grateful friendship . SIMONE WEIL 1Malheur , c.f . the essay on this subject , p. 61 . 1 By George Herbert . It reads : —Love bade me welcome : yet my soul drew back , Guiltie of dust and sinne . But quick-ey ’ d Love , observing me grow slack From my first entrance in , Drew nearer to me , sweetly questioning If I lack ’ d any thing . ‘ A guest , ’ I answer ’ d , ‘ worthy to be here : ’ Love said , ‘ You shall be he. ’ I the unkinde , ungratefull ? Ah my deare , I can not look on thee. ’ Love took my hand , and smiling did reply , ‘ Who made the eyes but ? ’ ‘ Truth Lord , but I have marr ’ d them : let my shame Go where it doth deserve. ’ ‘ And know you not , sayes Love , who bore the blame ? ’ ‘ My deare , then I will serve. ’ ‘ You must sit down , ’ sayes Love , ‘ and taste my meat : ’ So I did sit and eat . LETTER V HER INTELLECTUAL VOCATION From Casablanca Dear S. , I am sending you four things . First a personal letter for Father Perrin . It is very long and contains nothing which can not wait indefinitely . Do not send it to him ; give it to him when you see him and tell him not to read it until one day when he has leisure and liberty of mind . Secondly ( in an envelope which I have stuck up for convenience but which you are to open as well as the other two ) , you will find the commentary of the Pythagorean texts , which I did not have time to finish , and which is to be joined to the work I left with you when I came away . It will be quite easy , because it is numbered . The way it is drawn up and put together is horribly bad ; it is certainly very difficult to follow if read aloud and far too long to be copied out . But I can only send it as it is . Thirdly , I have also enclosed the copy of a translation of a fragment from Sophocles which I found among my papers . It is the whole dialogue between Electra and Orestes of which I had only copied a few verses in the work you have already . As I wrote it out , each word struck the very centre of my being with so deep and so secret a resonance that the interpretation which sees Electra as the human soul and Orestes as Christ is almost as certain for me as if I had written these verses myself . Tell Father Perrin that too . In reading the text he will understand . Read him also what I am writing you now ; I hope from the bottom of my heart that it will not grieve him too much . In finishing the work on the Pythagoreans , I felt definitively and certainly , as far as a human being has the right to use these two words , that my vocation imposes upon me the necessity of remaining outside the Church , without so much as engaging myself in any way , even implicitly , to her or to the dogmas of Christianity ; in any case for as long as I am not quite in-capable of intellectual work . And that is in order that I may serve God and the Christian faith in the realm of the intelligence . The degree of intellectual honesty which is obligatory for me , by reason of my particular vocation , demands that my thought should be indifferent to all ideas without exception , including for instance materialism and atheism ; it must be equally welcoming and equally reserved with regard to everyone of them . Water is indifferent in this way to the objects which fall into it . It does not weigh them ; it is they which weigh themselves , after a certain time of oscillation . I know quite well that I am not really like this , it would be too beautiful ; but I am under an obligation to be like this ; and I could never be like this if I were in the Church . In my particular case , in order to be born of water and the spirit , I must abstain from the visible water . It is not that I feel within me a capacity for intellectual creation . But I feel obligations which are related to such a creation . It is not my fault . Nobody but myself can appreciate these obligations . The conditions of intellectual or artistic creation are so intimate and secret that no one can penetrate into them from outside . I know that artists excuse their bad actions in this way . But it has to do with something very different in my case . This indifference of thought on the level of the intelligence is in no way incompatible with the love of God , or even with a vow of love inwardly renewed each second of each day , each time eternal and each time wholly complete and new . I should be like this if I were what I ought to be . This position may seem to be very unstably balanced , but faithfulness , of which I hope God will not refuse me the grace , makes it possible to remain thus indefinitely without moving ( en hypomene ) . It is for the service of Christ as the Truth that I deprive myself of sharing in his flesh in the way he has instituted . He deprives me of it , to be more exact , for never up till now have I had even for a second the impression of there being any choice . I am as certain as a human being has the right to be that I am deprived in this way for my whole life ; except perhaps—only perhaps—if circumstances make intellectual work definitively and totally impossible for me . If this grieves Father Perrin I can only hope that he may forget me soon ; for I would infinitely prefer to have no place in his thoughts than to be the cause of the slightest sorrow to him . Unless by chance he were able to draw some good from it . To return to my list , I am also sending you the paper on the spiritual employment of school studies , which I had taken away by mistake . That is for Father Perrin too on account of his indirect relations with the jécistes1 of Montpellier . Anyhow he can do what he likes with it . Do let me thank you again from the bottom of my heart for your kindness to me . I shall often think of you . I hope that we shall have news of each other from time to time but it is not certain . Yours affectionately , SIMONE WEIL 1 Members of the J.E.C . ( Jeunesse Etudiante Chrétienne ) . There are also movements known as the J.O.C . ( Jeunesse Ouvrière Chrétienne ) and the J.A.C . ( Jeunesse Agricole Chrétienne ) . LETTER VI LAST THOUGHTS 26th May 1942 ( From Casablanca ) Father , It was a very kind act on your part , to write to me all the same . I valued having a few affectionate words from you at the moment of leaving . You quoted some glorious words of St. Paul . I hope though that in owning my wretchedness to you I did not give you the impression of misunderstanding God ’ s mercy . I hope I have never fallen , and never shall fall , to such a depth of cowardice and ungratitude . I do not need any hope or any promise in order to believe that God is rich in mercy . I know this wealth of his with the certainty of experience , I have touched it . What I know of it through actual contact is so far beyond my capacity of understanding and gratitude that even the promise of future bliss could add nothing to it for me ; since for human intelligence the addition of two infinites is not an addition . God ’ s mercy is manifest in affliction as in joy , by the same right ; more perhaps , because under this form it has no human analogy . Man ’ s mercy is only shown in giving joy , or maybe in inflicting pain with a view to outward results , bodily healing or education . But it is not the outward results of affliction which bear witness to divine mercy . The outward results of true affliction are nearly always bad . We lie when we try to disguise this . It is in affliction itself that the splendour of God ’ s mercy shines ; from its very depths , in the heart of its inconsolable bitterness . If still persevering in our love , we fall to the point where the soul can not keep back the cry ‘ My God , why hast thou forsaken me ? ’ if we remain at this point without ceasing to love , we end by touching something which is not affliction , which is not joy ; something which is the central essence , necessary and pure ; something not of the senses , common to joy and sorrow ; something which is the very love of God . We know then that joy is the sweetness of contact with the love of God , that affliction is the wound of this same contact when it is painful , and that only the contact matters , not the manner of it . It is the same as when we see someone very dear to us after a long absence , the words we exchange with him do not matter , but only the sound of his voice , which assures us of his presence . The knowledge of this presence of God does not afford consolation , it takes nothing from the fearful bitterness of affliction , nor does it heal the mutilation of the soul . But we know quite certainly that God ’ s love for us is the very substance of this bitterness and this mutilation . I should like out of gratitude to be able to bear witness to this . The poet of the Iliad loved God enough to have the capacity . This indeed is the implicit signification of the poem and the one source of its beauty . But it has scarcely been understood . Even if there were nothing more for us than life on earth , even if the instant of death were to bring us nothing new , the infinite superabundance of the divine mercy is already secretly present here below in its entirety . If , by an absurd hypothesis , I were to die without ever having committed any serious faults and yet all the same I were to fall to the bottom of hell , I should nevertheless owe God an infinite debt of gratitude for his infinite mercy , on account of my earthly life , and that notwithstanding the fact that I am such a poor unsatisfactory creature . Even in this hypothesis I should think all the same that I had received all my share of the riches of divine mercy . For already here below we receive the capacity for loving God and for representing him to ourselves with complete certainty as having the substance of real , eternal , perfect and infinite joy . Through our fleshly veils we receive from above presages of eternity which are enough to efface all doubts on this subject . What more can we ask or desire ? A mother or a lover who knew for certain that her son , or her beloved , was full of joy would have no thought in her heart capable of asking or desiring anything else . We have much more . What we love is perfect joy itself . When we know this , even hope becomes superfluous , it no longer has any meaning . The only thing left to hope for is the grace not to be disobedient here below . The rest is the affair of God alone and does not concern us . That is why I lack nothing , although my imagination mutilated as it is by over-long and uninterrupted suffering can not conceive of salvation as of something possible for me . What you say can have no effect except to persuade me that you really have some friendship for me . From that point of view I treasure your letter greatly . It has not been able to affect me in any other way . But that was not necessary . I know enough of my miserable weakness to suppose that a little adverse fortune would perhaps suffice to fill my soul with suffering to such a point that for a long time no room would be left for the thoughts I have just described to you . But even that does not matter very much . Certitude does not depend upon states of soul . Certitude is always in perfect security . There is only one time when I really know nothing of this certitude any longer . It is when I am in contact with the affliction of other people , those who are indifferent or unknown to me as much as the others , perhaps even more , including those of the most remote ages of antiquity . This contact causes me such atrocious pain and so utterly rends my soul , that as a result the love of God becomes almost impossible for me for a while . It would take very little more to make me say impossible . So much so that I am uneasy about myself . I reassure myself a little by remembering that Christ wept on foreseeing the horrors of the destruction of Jerusalem . I hope he will forgive me my compassion . You give me pain by writing that the day of my baptism would be a great joy for you . After having received so much from you , it is in my power to cause you joy ; and yet it does not enter my head for a second to do so . I can not help it . I really believe that only God has the power to prevent me from causing you joy . Even if we only consider the plane of purely human relations , the gratitude I owe you is infinite . I think that except you , all those human beings for whom I have made it easy to hurt me through my friendship , have amused themselves by doing so , frequently or occasionally , consciously or unconsciously , but all of them at some time or another . Where I recognised it to be conscious , I took a knife and cut out the friendship , without however warning the person in question . They did not behave like this from malice , but as a result of the well-known phenomenon which makes hens rush upon one of their number if it is wounded , attacking and pecking it . All men bear this animal nature within them . It determines their attitude towards their fellows , with or without their knowledge and consent . Thus it sometimes happens that without the mind realising anything , the animal nature in a man senses the mutilation of the animal nature in another and reacts accordingly . It is the same for all possible situations and the corresponding animal reactions . This mechanical necessity holds all men in its grip at every moment . They only escape from it in proportion to the place held in their souls by the authentically supernatural . Even partial discernment is very difficult in this matter . If , however , it really were completely possible , we should have there a criterium of the part played by the supernatural in the life of a soul , a sure criterion , exact as a balance and quite independent of any religious beliefs . It is that among many other things that Christ indicated when he said : ‘ These two commandments are one. ’ It is only with you that I have never felt the backlash of this mechanism . My situation with regard to you is like that of a beggar , reduced by extreme poverty to a state of constant hunger , who for the space of a year had been going at intervals to a prosperous house where he was given bread , and who , for the first time in his life , had not suffered humiliation . Such a beggar , if he had a whole life to give in exchange for each morsel of bread , and if he gave them all , would think that his debt was in no way diminished . But the fact that with you human relations perpetually enshrine the light of God , should raise gratitude to a still higher degree in my case . Yet I am not going to give you any sign of gratitude unless it be to say things concerning you which might give you every reason to be irritated with me . For it is in no way fitting that I should say them , nor even think them . I have no right to do this , and I am well aware of it . As , however , it is a fact that I have thought them , I dare not keep them from you . If they are not true they will do no harm . It is not impossible that they contain some truth . In that case there would be good reason to think that God was sending you the truth through the pen which I am holding . It is more suitable for some thoughts to come by direct inspiration , it is more suitable for others to be transmitted through some creature . God uses either way , with his friends . It is well known that no matter what thing , a donkey for instance , can be used as agent without making any difference . It pleases God perhaps to choose the most worthless objects for this purpose . I am obliged to tell myself these things so as not to be afraid of my own thoughts . When I let you have a written sketch of my spiritual autobiography , I had a reason . I wanted to make it possible for you to see for yourself a concrete and certain example of implicit faith . Certain , for I knew that you know that I am not lying . Wrongly or rightly you think that I have a right to the name of Christian . I assure you that when in speaking of my childhood and youth I use the words vocation , obedience , spirit of poverty , purity , acceptance , love of one ’ s neighbour , and other expressions of the same kind , I am giving them the exact signification they have for me now . Yet I was brought up by my parents and my brother in a complete agnosticism , and I never made the slightest effort to depart from it ; I never had the slightest desire to do so , quite rightly , I think . In spite of that , ever since my birth , so to speak , not one of my faults , not one of my imperfections really had the excuse of ignorance . I shall have to answer for everything on that day when the Lamb shall come in anger . You can take my word for it too that Greece , Egypt , ancient India and ancient China , the beauty of the world , the pure and authentic reflections of this beauty in art and science , what I have seen of the inner recesses of human hearts where religious belief is unknown , all these things have done as much as the visibly Christian ones to deliver me into Christ ’ s hands as his captive . I think I might even say more . The love of those things which are outside visible Christianity keeps me outside the Church . Such a spiritual destiny must seem unintelligible to you . But for this very reason it provides useful matter for reflection . It is good to reflect about whatever forces us to come out of ourselves . I have difficulty in imagining how it can be that you really have some friendship for me ; but as you apparently have , it may be for this purpose . In theory you fully admit the possibility of implicit faith . In practice also you have a breadth of mind and an intellectual honesty which are very exceptional . Yet they still seem to me very insufficient . Only perfection is sufficient . Wrongly or rightly I have often thought I could detect a bias in some of your attitudes . Notably a certain unwillingness when it comes to real facts to admit the possibility of implicit faith in particular cases . At least I had that impression in talking to you about B…and above all about a Spanish peasant whom I regard as being not very far from sanctity . It is true that it was probably my own fault more than anything else ; my awkwardness is so great that I always do harm to those I love when I speak of them ; I have often experienced this . But it also seems to me that when one speaks to you of unbelievers who are in affliction and accept their affliction as a part of the order of the world , it does not impress you in the same way as if it were a question of Christians and of submission to the will of God . Yet it is the same thing . At any rate if I really have the right to be called a Christian , I know from experience that the virtue of the Stoics and that of the Christians are one and the same virtue . I mean true Stoical virtue of course , which is before anything else love ; not the caricature which a few Roman brutes made of it . In theory I do not think that you would be able to deny it either . But , when it comes to facts and to concrete examples from the contemporary world , you dislike recognising the possibility of Stoical virtue having supernatural efficacity . You also hurt me very much one day by using the word false when you meant non-orthodox . You corrected yourself immediately . To my mind there is a confusion of terms there which is incompatible with perfect intellectual honesty . It is impossible that such a thing should be pleasing to Christ , who is the Truth . It seems to me certain that this constitutes a serious imperfection in you . And why should there be any imperfection in you ? It does not suit you in the least to be imperfect . It is like a wrong note in a beautiful song . I believe this imperfection comes from attaching yourself to the Church as to an earthly country . As a matter of fact , as well as being your bond with the heavenly country , it is a terrestrial country for you . You live there in an atmosphere of human warmth . That makes a little attachment almost inevitable . Such an attachment is perhaps for you that infinitely fine thread of which Saint John of the Cross speaks , which so long as it is not broken holds the bird down on the ground as effectively as a great metal chain . I imagine that the last thread , although very fine , must be the most difficult to cut , for when it is cut we have to fly and that is frightening . But all the same the obligation is imperative . The children of God should not have any other country here below but the universe itself , with the totality of all the reasoning creatures it ever has contained , contains , or ever will contain . That is the native city to which we owe our love . Less vast things than the universe , among them the Church , impose obligations which can be extremely far-reaching . They do not , however , include the obligation to love . At least that is what I believe . I am moreover convinced that no obligation relating to the intelligence is to be found among them either . Our love should stretch as widely across all space , and should be as equally distributed in every portion of it , as is the very light of the sun . Christ has bidden us to attain to the perfection of our heavenly Father by imitating his indiscriminate bestowal of light . Our intelligence too should have the same complete impartiality . Every existing thing is equally upheld in its existence by God ’ s creative love . The friends of God should love him to the point of merging their love into his with regard to all things here below . When a soul has attained a love which fills the whole universe indiscriminately , this love becomes the chicken with golden wings which pierces an opening in the egg of the world . After that , such a soul loves the universe , not from within but from without ; from the dwelling-place of the Wisdom of God , our first-born brother . Such a love does not love beings and things in God , but from the abode of God . Being close to God it views all beings and things from there , and its gaze is merged in the gaze of God . We have to be catholic , that is to say not bound by so much as a thread to any created thing , unless it be to creation in its totality . Formerly , in the case of the Saints , it was possible for this universality to be implicit , even in their own conscious-ness . They were able implicitly to give the rightful place in their soul , on the one hand to the love due only to God and to all his creation , on the other to their obligations to all that is smaller than the universe . I think that Saint Francis and Saint John of the Cross were like this . That was why they were both of them poets . It is true that we have to love our neighbour , but , in the example that Christ gave as an illustration of this commandment , the neighbour is a being of whom nothing is known , lying naked , bleeding and unconscious on the road . It is a question of completely anonymous , and for that reason completely universal love . It is also true that Christ said to his disciples : ‘ Love one another. ’ But I think that there it is a question of friendship , a personal friendship between two beings , by which God ’ s friends should be bound each to each . Friendship is the one legitimate exception to the duty of only loving universally . Moreover , to my way of thinking , it is not really pure unless it is so to speak surrounded on all sides by a compact envelope of indifference which preserves a distance . We are living in times which have no precedent , and in our present situation universality , which could formerly be implicit , has to be fully explicit . It has to permeate our language and the whole of our way of life . Today it is not nearly enough merely to be a saint , but we must have the saintliness demanded by the present moment , a new saintliness , itself also without precedent . Maritain said this , but he only enumerated the aspects of saintliness of former days , which for the time being at least , have become out of date . He did not feel all the miraculous newness which the saintliness of today must contain in compensation . A new type of sanctity is indeed a fresh spring , an invention . If all is kept in proportion and if the order of each thing is preserved , it is almost equivalent to a new revelation of the universe and of human destiny . It is the exposure of a large portion of truth and beauty hitherto concealed under a thick layer of dust . More genius is needed than was needed by Archimedes to invent mechanics and physics . A new saintliness is a still more marvellous invention . Only a kind of perversity can oblige God ’ s friends to deprive themselves of having genius , since to receive it in superabundance they only need to ask their Father for it in Christ ’ s name . Such a petition is legitimate , today at any rate , because it is necessary . I think that under this or any equivalent form it is the first thing we have to ask for now , we have to ask for it daily , hourly , like a famished child constantly asks for bread . The world needs saints who have genius , just as a plague-stricken town needs doctors . Where there is a need there is also an obligation . I can not make any use of these thoughts , nor of all those which go with them in my mind . In the first place the considerable imperfection which I am cowardly enough to leave within myself , keeps me at far too great a distance from the point at which they can be put into practice . That is unpardonable on my part . So great a distance , in the best of cases , can only be crossed with the help of time . But even if I had already crossed it , I am an instrument which is all rotten . I am too worn out . And even if I believed in the possibility of God ’ s consenting to repair the mutilations of my nature , I could not bring myself to ask it of him . Even if I were sure of his consenting , I could not . Such a request would seem to me an offence against the infinitely tender Love which has made me the gift of affliction . If no one consents to take any notice of the thoughts which , though I can not explain why , have settled in so inadequate a being as myself , they will be buried with me . If , as I believe , they contain some truth , it will be a pity . I am prejudicial to them . The fact that they happen to be in me prevents people from paying any attention to them . I see no one but you whom I can implore to give them your attention . I should like you to transfer the charity you have so generously bestowed from me to that which I bear within me , and which I like to think is of far more value than I am myself . It is a great sorrow for me to fear that the thoughts which have come down into me should be condemned to death through the contagion of my inadequacy and wretchedness . I never read the story of the barren fig tree without trembling . I think that it is a portrait of me . In it also , nature was powerless , and yet it was not excused . Christ cursed it . That is why although there are perhaps not any particular faults in my life which are really serious , except those I have owned to you , I think when I consider things in the cold light of reason that I have more just cause to fear God ’ s anger than many a great criminal . It is not that I actually do fear it . By a strange twist , the thought of God ’ s anger only arouses love in me . It is the thought of the possible favour of God and of his mercy that makes me tremble with a sort of fear . On the other hand the sense of being like a barren fig tree for Christ tears my heart . Happily God can quite easily send not only the same thoughts , supposing they are good , but a great many much better ones to somebody who is unblemished and capable of serving him . But who knows if those which are in me are not sent , partly at any rate , so that you should make some use of them ? They can only be destined for someone who has a little friendship for me , and friendship which is true . Because as regards other people , in a sense I do not exist for them . I am the colour of dead leaves , like certain insects which go unnoticed . Forgive me if in all I have just written to you anything from my pen should strike you as erroneous or out of place . Do not be angry with me . I do not know whether I shall be able to send you my news or to receive yours in the course of the weeks and months that are to come . But it is only for me that this separation is a mis-fortune , and therefore , it is not important . I can only assure you yet again of my filial gratitude and my boundless friendship . SIMONE WEIL ESSAYS REFLECTIONS ON THE RIGHT USE OF SCHOOL STUDIES WITH A VIEW TO THE LOVE OF GOD REFLECTIONS ON THE RIGHT USE OF SCHOOL STUDIES WITH A VIEW TO THE LOVE OF GOD This was probably written by Simone Weil in April , 1942 , and sent to Father Perrin , when he was Superior of the Dominicans of Montpellier , in order to help the Catholic students with whom he was in contact . The Key to a Christian conception of studies is the realization that prayer consists of attention . It is the orientation of all the attention of which the soul is capable towards God . The quality of the attention counts for much in the quality of the prayer . Warmth of heart can not make up for it . It is the highest part of the attention only which makes contact with God , when prayer is intense and pure enough for such a contact to be established ; but the whole attention is turned towards God . Of course school exercises only develop a lower kind of attention . Nevertheless they are extremely effective in increasing the power of attention which will be available at the time of prayer , on condition that they are carried out with a view to this purpose and this purpose alone . Although people seem to be unaware of it today , the development of the faculty of attention forms the real object and almost the sole interest of studies . Most school tasks have a certain intrinsic interest as well , but such an interest is secondary . All tasks which really call upon the power of attention are interesting for the same reason and to an almost equal degree . School children and students who love God should never say : ‘ For my part I like mathematics ’ ; ‘ I like French ’ ; ‘ I like Greek. ’ They should learn to like all these subjects , because all of them develop that faculty of attention which , directed towards God , is the very substance of prayer . If we have no aptitude or natural taste for geometry this does not mean that our faculty for attention will not be developed by wrestling with a problem or studying a theorem . On the contrary it is almost an advantage . It does not even matter much whether we succeed in finding the solution or understanding the proof , although it is important to try really hard to do so . Never in any case whatever is a genuine effort of the attention wasted . It always has its effect on the spiritual plane and in consequence on the lower one of the intelligence , for all spiritual light lightens the mind . If we concentrate our attention on trying to solve a problem of geometry , and if at the end of an hour we are no nearer to doing so than at the beginning , we have nevertheless been making progress each minute of that hour in another more mysterious dimension . Without our knowing or feeling it , this apparently barren effort has brought more light into the soul . The result will one day be discovered in prayer . Moreover it may very likely be felt besides in some department of the intelligence in no way connected with mathematics . Perhaps he who made the unsuccessful effort will one day be able to grasp the beauty of a line of Racine more vividly on account of it . But it is certain that this effort will bear its fruit in prayer . There is no doubt whatever about that . Certainties of this kind are experimental . But if we do not believe in them before experiencing them , if at least we do not behave as though we believed in them , we shall never have the experience which leads to such certainties . There is a kind of contradiction here . Above a given level this is the case with all useful knowledge concerning spiritual progress . If we do not regulate our conduct by it before having proved it , if we do not hold on to it for a long time only by faith , a faith at first stormy and without light , we shall never transform it into certainty . Faith is the indispensable condition . The best support for faith is the guarantee that if we ask our Father for bread , he does not give us a stone . Quite apart from explicit religious belief , every time that a human being succeeds in making an effort of attention with the sole idea of increasing his grasp of truth , he acquires a greater aptitude for grasping it , even if his effort produces no visible fruit . An Eskimo story explains the origin of light as follows : ‘ In the eternal darkness , the crow , unable to find any food , longed for light , and the earth was illumined. ’ If there is a real desire , if the thing desired is really light , the desire for light produces it . There is a real desire when there is an effort of attention . It is really light that is desired if all other incentives are absent . Even if our efforts of attention seem for years to be producing no result , one day a light which is in exact proportion to them will flood the soul . Every effort adds a little gold to a treasure which no power on earth can take away . The useless efforts made by the Curé d ’ Ars , for long and painful years , in his attempt to learn Latin bore fruit in the marvellous discernment which enabled him to see the very soul of his penitents behind their words and even their silences . Students must therefore work without any wish to gain good marks , to pass examinations , to win school successes ; without any reference to their natural abilities and tastes ; applying themselves equally to all their tasks , with the idea that each one will help to form in them the habit of that attention which is the substance of prayer . When we set out to do a piece of work , it is necessary to wish to do it correctly , because such a wish is indispensable if there is to be true effort . Underlying this immediate objective , however , our deep purpose should aim solely at increasing the power of attention with a view to prayer ; as , when we write , we draw the shape of the letter on paper , not with a view to the shape , but with a view to the idea we want to express . To make this the sole and exclusive purpose of our studies is the first condition to be observed if we are to put them to the right use . The second condition is to take great pains to examine squarely and to contemplate attentively and slowly each school task in which we have failed , seeing how unpleasing and second-rate it is , without seeking any excuse or overlooking any mistake or any of our tutor ’ s corrections , trying to get down to the origin of each fault . There is a great temptation to do the opposite , to give a sideways glance at the corrected exercise if it is bad , and to hide it forthwith . Most of us do this nearly always . We have to withstand this temptation . Incidentally , moreover , nothing is more necessary for academic success , because , despite all our efforts , we work without making much progress when we refuse to give our attention to the faults we have made and our tutor ’ s corrections . Above all it is thus that we can acquire the virtue of humility and that is a far more precious treasure than all academic progress . From this point of view it is perhaps even more useful to contemplate our stupidity than our sin . Consciousness of sin gives us the feeling that we are evil , and a kind of pride sometimes finds a place in it . When we force ourselves to fix the gaze , not only of our eyes but of our souls , upon a school exercise in which we have failed through sheer stupidity , a sense of our mediocrity is borne in upon us with irresistible evidence . No knowledge is more to be desired . If we can arrive at knowing this truth with all our souls we shall be well established on the right foundation . If these two conditions are perfectly carried out there is no doubt that school studies are quite as good a road to sanctity as any other . To carry out the second , it is enough to wish to do so . This is not the case with the first . In order really to pay attention , it is necessary to know how to set about it . Most often attention is confused with a kind of muscular effort . If one says to one ’ s pupils : ‘ Now you must pay attention , ’ one sees them contracting their brows , holding their breath , stiffening their muscles . If after two minutes they are asked what they have been paying attention to , they can not reply . They have been concentrating on nothing . They have not been paying attention . They have been contracting their muscles . We often expend this kind of muscular effort on our studies . As it ends by making us tired , we have the impression that we have been working . That is an illusion . Tiredness has nothing to do with work . Work itself is the useful effort , whether it is tiring or not . This kind of muscular effort in work is entirely barren , even if it is made with the best of intentions . Good intentions in such cases are among those that pave the way to hell . Studies conducted in such a way can sometimes succeed academically from the point of view of gaining marks and passing examinations , but that is in spite of the effort and thanks to natural gifts ; moreover such studies are never of any use . Will power , the kind that , if need be , makes us set our teeth and endure suffering , is the principal weapon of the apprentice engaged in manual work . But , contrary to the usual belief , it has practically no place in study . The intelligence can only be led by desire . For there to be desire , there must be pleasure and joy in the work . The intelligence only grows and bears fruit in joy . The joy of learning is as indispensable in study as breathing is in running . Where it is lacking there are no real students , but only poor caricatures of apprentices who , at the end of their apprenticeship , will not even have a trade . It is the part played by joy in our studies that makes of them a preparation for spiritual life , for desire directed towards God is the only power capable of raising the soul . Or rather , it is God alone who comes down and possesses the soul , but desire alone draws God down . He only comes to those who ask him to come ; and he can not refuse to come to those who implore him long , often and ardently . Attention is an effort , the greatest of all efforts perhaps , but it is a negative effort . Of itself , it does not involve tiredness . When we become tired , attention is scarcely possible any more , unless we have already had a good deal of practice . It is better to stop working altogether , to seek some relaxation , and then a little later to return to the task ; we have to press on and loosen up alternately , just as we breathe in and out . Twenty minutes of concentrated , untired attention is infinitely better than three hours of the kind of frowning application which leads us to say with a sense of duty done : ‘ I have worked well ! ’ But , in spite of all appearances , it is also far more difficult . There is something in our soul which has a far more violent repugnance for true attention than the flesh has for bodily fatigue . This something is much more closely connected with evil than is the flesh . That is why every time that we really concentrate our attention , we destroy the evil in ourselves . If we concentrate with this intention , a quarter of an hour of attention is better than a great many good works . Attention consists of suspending our thought , leaving it detached , empty and ready to be penetrated by the object , it means holding in our minds , within reach of this thought , but on a lower level and not in contact with it , the diverse knowledge we have acquired which we are forced to make use of . Our thought should be in relation to all particular and already formulated thoughts , as a man on a mountain who , as he looks forward , sees also below him , without actually looking at them , a great many forests and plains . Above all our thought should be empty , waiting , not seeking anything , but ready to receive in its naked truth the object which is to penetrate it . All wrong translations , all absurdities in geometry problems , all clumsiness of style and all faulty connection of ideas in compositions and essays , all such things are due to the fact that thought has seized upon some idea too hastily and being thus prematurely blocked , is not open to the truth . The cause is always that we have wanted to be too active ; we have wanted to carry out a search . This can be proved every time , for every fault , if we trace it to its root . There is no better exercise than such a tracing down of our faults , for this truth is one of those which we can only believe when we have experienced it hundreds and thousands of times . This is the way with all essential truths . We do not obtain the most precious gifts by going in search of them but by waiting for them . Man can not discover them by his own powers and if he sets out to seek for them he will find in their place counterfeits of which he will be unable to discern the falsity . The solution of a geometry problem does not in itself constitute a precious gift , but the same law applies to it because it is the image of something precious . Being a little fragment of particular truth , it is a pure image of the unique , eternal and living Truth , the very Truth which once in a human voice declared ‘ I am the Truth. ’ Every school exercise , thought of in this way , is like a sacrament . In every school exercise there is a special way of waiting upon truth , setting our hearts upon it , yet not allowing ourselves to go out in search of it . There is a way of giving our attention to the data of a problem in geometry without trying to find the solution , or to the words of a Latin or Greek text without trying to arrive at the meaning , a way of waiting , when we are writing , for the right word to come of itself at the end of our pen , while we merely reject all inadequate words . Our first duty towards school-children and students is to make known this method to them , not only in a general way but in the particular form which bears on each exercise . It is not only the duty of those who teach them , but also of their spiritual guides . Moreover the latter should bring out in a brilliantly clear light the correspondence between the attitude of the intelligence in each one of these exercises and the position of the soul , which , with its lamp well filled with oil , awaits the Bridegroom ’ s coming with confidence and desire . May each loving adolescent , as he works at his Latin prose , hope through this prose to come a little nearer to the instant when he will really be the slave—faithfully waiting while the master is absent , watching and listening—ready to open the door to him as soon as he knocks . The master will then make his slave sit down and himself serve him with meat . Only this waiting , this attention , can move the master to treat his slave with such amazing tenderness . When the slave has worn himself out in the fields , his master says on his return : ‘ Prepare my meal , and wait upon me. ’ And he considers the servant who only does what he is told to do to be unprofitable . To be sure in the realm of action we have to do all that is demanded of us , no matter what effort , weariness and suffering it may cost , for he who disobeys does not love ; but after that we are only unprofitable servants . Such service is a condition of love , but it is not enough . The thing which forces the master to make himself the slave of his slave , and to love him , has nothing to do with all that . Still less is it the result of a search which the servant might have been bold enough to undertake on his own initiative . It is only watching , waiting , attention . Happy then are those who pass their adolescence and youth in developing this power of attention . No doubt they are no nearer to goodness than their brothers working in fields and factories . They are near in a different way . Peasants and workmen possess a nearness to God of incomparable savour which is found in the depths of poverty , in the absence of social consideration and in the endurance of long drawn-out sufferings . If however we consider the occupations in themselves , studies are nearer to God because of the attention which is their soul . Whoever goes through years of study without developing this attention within himself has lost a great treasure . Not only does the love of God have attention for its substance ; the love of our neighbour , which we know to be the same love , is made of this same substance . Those who are unhappy have no need for anything in this world but people capable of giving them their attention . The capacity to give one ’ s attention to a sufferer is a very rare and difficult thing ; it is almost a miracle ; it is a miracle . Nearly all those who think they have this capacity do not possess it . Warmth of heart , impulsiveness , pity are not enough . In the first legend of the Grail , it is said that the Grail ( the miraculous stone vessel1 which satisfies all hunger by virtue of the consecrated host ) belongs to the first comer who asks the guardian of the vessel , a king three-quarters paralysed by the most painful wound : ‘ What are you going through ? ’ The love of our neighbour in all its fullness simply means being able to say to him : ‘ What are you going through ? ’ It is a recognition that the sufferer exists , not only as a unit in a collection , or a specimen from the social category labelled ‘ unfortunate , ’ but as a man , exactly like we are , who was one day stamped with a special mark by affliction . For this reason it is enough , but it is indispensable , to know how to look at him in a certain way . This way of looking is first of all attentive . The soul empties itself of all its own contents in order to receive into itself the being it is looking at , just as he is , in all his truth . Only he who is capable of attention can do this . So it comes about that , paradoxical as it may seem , a Latin prose or a geometry problem , even though they are done wrong , may be of great service one day , provided we devote the right kind of effort to them . Should the occasion arise , they can one day make us better able to give someone in affliction exactly the help required to save him , at the supreme moment of his need . For an adolescent , capable of grasping this truth and generous enough to desire this fruit above all others , studies could have their fullest spiritual effect , quite apart from any particular religious belief . Academic work is one of those fields which contain a pearl so precious that it is worth while to sell all our possessions , keeping nothing for ourselves , in order to be able to acquire it . 1 According to some legends the Grail was made of a single stone , in colour like an emerald . THE LOVE OF GOD AND AFFLICTION THE LOVE OF GOD AND AFFLICTION1 This was probably written in the spring of 1942 and given to Father Perrin by Simone Weil a few days before she left France . In the realm of suffering , affliction is something apart , specific and irreducible . It is quite a different thing from simple suffering . It takes possession of the soul and marks it through and through with its own particular mark , the mark of slavery . Slavery as practised by ancient Rome is only an extreme form of affliction . The men of antiquity , who knew all about this question , used to say : ‘ A man loses half his soul the day he becomes a slave. ’ Affliction is inseparable from physical suffering and yet quite distinct . With suffering , all that is not bound up with physical pain or something analogous is artificial , imaginary , and can be eliminated by a suitable adjustment of the mind . Even in the case of the absence or death of someone we love , the irreducible part of the sorrow is akin to physical pain , a difficulty in breathing , a constriction of the heart , an unsatisfied need , hunger , or the almost biological disorder caused by the brutal liberation of some energy , hitherto directed by an attachment and now left without a guide . A sorrow which is not centred around an irreducible core of such a nature is mere romanticism or literature . Humiliation is also a violent condition of the whole corporal being , which longs to surge up under the outrage but is forced , by impotence or fear , to hold itself in check . On the other hand pain which is only physical is a very unimportant matter and leaves no trace in the soul . Toothache is an example . An hour or two of violent pain caused by a decayed tooth is nothing once it is over . It is another matter if the physical suffering is very prolonged or frequent , but in such a case we are dealing with something quite different from an attack of pain ; it is often an affliction . Affliction is an uprooting of life , a more or less attenuated equivalent of death , made irresistibly present to the soul by the attack or immediate apprehension of physical pain . If there is complete absence of physical pain there is no affliction for the soul , because our thoughts can turn to no matter what object . Thought flies from affliction as promptly and irresistibly as an animal flies from death . Here below physical pain , and that alone , has the power to chain down our thoughts ; on condition that we count as physical pain certain phenomena which , though difficult to describe , are bodily and exactly equivalent to it . Fear of physical pain is a notable example . When thought is obliged by an attack of physical pain , however slight , to recognise the presence of affliction , a state of mind is brought about which is as acute as that of a condemned man who is forced to look for hours at the guillotine which is going to cut off his head . Human beings can live for twenty or fifty years in this acute state . We pass quite close to them without realising it . What man is capable of discerning such souls unless Christ himself looks through his eyes ? We only notice that they have rather a strange way of behaving and we censure this behaviour . There is not real affliction unless the event which has seized and uprooted a life attacks it , directly or indirectly , in all its parts , social , psychological and physical . The social factor is essential . There is not really affliction where there is not social degradation or the fear of it in some form or another . There is both continuity and the separation of a definite point of entry , as with the temperature at which water boils , between affliction itself and all the sorrows which , even though they may be very violent , very deep and very lasting , are not affliction in the strict sense . There is a limit ; on the far side of it we have affliction but not on the near side . This limit is not purely objective , all sorts of personal factors have to be taken into account . The same event may plunge one human being into affliction and not another . The great enigma of human life is not suffering but affliction . It is not surprising that the innocent are killed , tortured , driven from their country , made destitute or reduced to slavery , imprisoned in camps or cells , since there are criminals to perform such actions . It is not surprising either that disease is the cause of long sufferings , which paralyse life and make it into an image of death , since nature is at the mercy of the blind play of mechanical necessities . But it is surprising that God should have given affliction the power to seize the very souls of the innocent and to take possession of them as their sovereign lord . At the very best , he who is branded by affliction will only keep half his soul . As for those who have been struck by one of those blows which leave a being struggling on the ground like a half crushed worm , they have no words to express what is happening to them . Among the people they meet , those who have never had contact with affliction in its true sense can have no idea of what it is , even though they may have suffered a great deal . Affliction is something specific and impossible to describe in any other terms , like the sounds of which nothing can convey the slightest idea to anyone who is deaf and dumb . And as for those who have themselves been mutilated by affliction , they are in no state to help anyone at all , and they are almost incapable of even wishing to do so . Thus compassion for the afflicted is an impossibility . When it is really found we have a more astounding miracle than walking on water , healing the sick , or even raising the dead . Affliction constrained Christ to implore that he might be spared ; to seek consolation from man ; to believe he was forsaken by the Father . It forced a just man to cry out against God ; a just man as perfect as human nature can be ; more so , perhaps , if Job is less a historical character than a figure of Christ . ‘ He laughs at the affliction of the innocent ! This is not blasphemy but a genuine cry of anguish . The Book of Job is a pure marvel of truth and authenticity from beginning to end . As regards affliction , all that departs from this model is more or less stained with falsehood . Affliction makes God appear to be absent for a time , more absent than a dead man , more absent that light in the utter darkness of a cell . A kind of horror submerges the whole soul . During this absence there is nothing to love . What is terrible is that if , in this darkness where there is nothing to love , the soul ceases to love , God ’ s absence becomes final . The soul has to go on loving in the emptiness , or at least to go on wanting to love , though it may only be with an infinitesimal part of itself . Then , one day , God will come to show himself to this soul and to reveal the beauty of the world to it , as in the case of Job . But if the soul stops loving it falls , even in this life , into something which is almost equivalent to hell . That is why those who plunge men into affliction before they are prepared to receive it , kill their souls . On the other hand in a time such as ours , where affliction is hanging over us all , help given to souls is only effective if it goes far enough really to prepare them for affliction . That is no small thing . Affliction hardens and discourages us because , like a red hot iron , it stamps the soul to its very depths with the scorn , the disgust and even the self-hatred and sense of guilt and defilement which crime logically should produce but actually does not . Evil dwells in the heart of the criminal without being felt there . It is felt in the heart of the man who is afflicted and innocent . Everything happens as though the state of soul suitable for criminals had been separated from crime and attached to affliction ; and it even seems to be in proportion to the innocence of those who are afflicted . If Job cries out that he is innocent in such despairing accents , it is because he himself is beginning not to believe in it , it is because his soul within him is taking the side of his friends . He implores God himself to bear witness , because he no longer hears the testimony of his own conscience ; it is no longer anything but an abstract , lifeless memory for him . Men have the same carnal nature as animals . If a hen is hurt , the others rush upon it , attacking it with their beaks . This phenomenon is as automatic as gravitation . Our senses attach all the scorn , all the revulsion , all the hatred which our reason attaches to crime , to affliction . Except for those whose whole soul is inhabited by Christ , everybody despises the afflicted to some extent , although . practically no one is conscious of it . This law of sensibility also holds good with regard to ourselves . In the case of someone in affliction , all the scorn , revulsion and hatred are turned inwards . They penetrate to the centre of the soul and from there colour the whole universe with their poisoned light . Supernatural love , if it has survived , can prevent this second result from coming about , but not the first . The first is of the very essence of affliction ; there is no affliction without it . ‘ Christ…being made a curse for us. ’ It was not only the body of Christ , hanging on the wood , which was accursed , it was his whole soul also . In the same way every innocent being in his affliction feels himself accursed . This even goes on being true for those who have been in affliction and have come out of it , through a change in their fortunes ; that is to say if the affliction ate deeply enough into them . Another effect of affliction is , little by little , to make the soul its accomplice , by injecting a poison of inertia into it . In anyone who has suffered affliction for a long enough time there is a complicity with regard to his own affliction . This complicity impedes all the efforts he might make to improve his lot ; it goes so far as to prevent him from seeking a way of deliverance , sometimes even to the point of preventing him from wishing for deliverance . Then he is established in affliction , and people might think he was satisfied . Further , this complicity may even induce him to shun the means of deliverance . In such cases it veils itself with excuses which are often ridiculous . Even a person who has come through his affliction will still have something left in him which impels him to plunge into it again , if it has bitten deeply and for ever into the substance of his soul . It is as though affliction had established itself in him like a parasite and were directing him to suit its own purposes . Sometimes this impulse triumphs over all the movements of the soul towards happiness . If the affliction has been ended as a result of some kindness , it may take the form of hatred for the benefactor ; such is the cause of certain apparently inexplio able acts of savage ingratitude . It is sometimes easy to deliver an unhappy man from his present distress , but it is difficult to set him free from his past affliction . Only God can do it . And even the grace of God itself can not cure irremediably wounded nature here below . The glorified body of Christ bore the marks of the nails and spear . One can only accept the existence of affliction by considering it as a distance . God created through love and for love . God did not create anything except love itself , and the means to love . He created love in all its forms . He created beings capable of love from all possible distances . Because no other could do it , he himself went to the greatest possible distance , the infinite distance . This infinite distance between God and God , this supreme tearing apart , this agony beyond all others , this marvel of love , is the crucifixion . Nothing can be further from God than that which has been made accursed . This tearing apart , over which supreme love places the bond of supreme union , echoes perpetually across the universe in the midst of the silence , like two notes , separate yet melting into one , like pure and heart-rending harmony . This is the Word of God . The whole creation is nothing but its vibration . When human music in its greatest purity pierces our soul , this is what we hear through it . When we have learnt to hear the silence , this is what we grasp more distinctly through it . Those who persevere in love hear this note from the very lowest depths into which affliction has thrust them . From that moment they can no longer have any doubt . Men struck down by affliction are at the foot of the Cross , almost at the greatest possible distance from God . It must not be thought that sin is a greater distance . Sin is not a distance , it is a turning of our gaze in the wrong direction . It is true that there is a mysterious connection between this distance and an original disobedience . From the beginning , we are told , humanity turned its gaze away from God and walked in the wrong direction for as far as it could go . That was because it could walk then . As for us , we are nailed down to the spot , only free to choose which way we look , ruled by necessity . A blind mechanism , heedless of degrees of spiritual perfection , continually tosses men about and throws some of them at the very foot of the Cross . It rests with them to keep or not to keep their eyes turned towards God through all the jolting . It does not mean that God ’ s Providence is lacking . It is in his Providence that God has willed that necessity should be like a blind mechanism . If the mechanism were not blind there would not be any affliction . Affliction is anonymous before all things , it deprives its victims of their personality and makes them into things . It is indifferent ; and it is the coldness of this indifference—a metallic coldness—which freezes all those it touches right to the depths of their souls . They will never find warmth again . They will never believe any more that they are anyone . Affliction would not have this power without the element of chance which it contains . Those who are persecuted for their faith and are aware of the fact are not afflicted , although they have to suffer . They only fall into a state of affliction if suffering or fear fills the soul to the point of making it forget the cause of the persecution . The martyrs who entered the arena , singing as they went to face the wild beasts , were not afflicted . Christ was afflicted . He did not die like a martyr . He died like a common criminal , confused with thieves , only a little more ridiculous . For affliction is ridiculous . Only blind necessity can throw men to the extreme point of distance , right next the Cross . Human crime , which is the cause of most affliction , is part of blind necessity , because criminals do not know what they are doing . There are two forms of friendship ; meeting and separation . They are indissoluble . Both of them contain some good , and this good of friendship is unique , for when two beings who are not friends are near each other there is no meeting , and when friends are far apart there is no separation . As both forms contain the same good thing , they are both equally good . God produces himself and knows himself perfectly , just as we in our miserable fashion make and know objects outside ourselves . But , before all things , God is love . Before all things God loves himself . This love , this friendship of God , is the Trinity . Between the terms united by this relation of divine love there is more than nearness ; there is infinite nearness or identity . But , resulting from the Creation , the Incarnation and the Passion , there is also infinite distance . The totality of space and the totality of time , interposing their immensity , put an infinite distance between God and God . Lovers or friends desire two things . The one is to love each other so much that they enter into each other and only make one being . The other is to love each other so much that , having half the globe between them , their union will not be diminished in the slightest degree . All that man vainly desires here below is perfectly realised in God . We have all those impossible desires within us as a mark of our destination , and they are good for us when we no longer hope to accomplish them . The love between God and God , which in itself is God , is this bond of double virtue ; the bond which unites two beings so closely that they are no longer distinguishable and really form a single unity , and the bond which stretches across distance and triumphs over infinite separation . The unity of God , wherein all plurality disappears , and the abandonment , wherein Christ believes he is left while never ceasing to love his Father perfectly , these are two forms expressing the divine virtue of the same Love , the Love which is God himself . God is so essentially love that the unity , which in a sense is his actual definition , is the pure effect of love . Moreover , corresponding to the infinite virtue of unification belonging to this love , there is the infinite separation over which it triumphs , which is the whole creation spread throughout the totality of space and time , made of mechanically harsh matter and interposed between Christ and his Father . As for us men , our misery gives us the infinitely precious privilege of sharing in this distance placed between the Son and his Father . This distance is only separation , however , for those who love . For those who love , separation , although painful , is a good , because it is love . Even the distress of the abandoned Christ is a good . There can not be a greater good for us on earth than to share in it . God can never be perfectly present to us here below on account of our flesh . But he can be almost perfectly absent from us in extreme affliction . This is the only possibility of perfection for us on earth . That is why the Cross is our only hope . ‘ No forest bears such a tree , with such blossom , such foliage and such fruit. ’ This universe where we are living , and of which we form a tiny particle , is the distance put by Love between God and God . We are a point in this distance . Space , time and the mechanism that governs matter are the distance . Everything that we call evil is only this mechanism . God has provided that when his grace penetrates to the very centre of a man and from there illuminates all his being , he is able to walk on the water without violating any of the laws of nature . When , however , a man turns away from God , he simply gives himself up to the law of gravity . Then he thinks that he can decide and choose , but he is only a thing , a stone that falls . If we examine human society and souls closely and with real attention , we see that wherever the virtue of supernatural light is absent , everything is obedient to mechanical laws as blind and as exact as the laws of gravitation . To know this is profit-able and necessary . Those whom we call criminals are only tiles blown off a roof by the wind and falling at random . Their only fault is the initial choice which made them into such tiles . The mechanism of necessity can be transposed on to any level while still remaining true to itself . It is the same in the world of pure matter , in the animal world , among nations and in souls . Seen from our present stand-point , and in human perspective , it is quite blind . If . however , we transport our hearts beyond ourselves , beyond the universe , beyond space and time to where our Father dwells , and if from there we behold this mechanism , it appears quite different . What seemed to be necessity becomes obedience . Matter is entirely passive and in consequence entirely obedient to God ’ s will . It is a perfect model for us . There can not be any being other than God and that which obeys God . On account of its perfect obedience , matter deserves to be loved by those who love its Master , in the same way as a needle , handled by the beloved wife he has lost , is cherished by a lover . The beauty of the world gives us an intimation of its claim to a place in our heart . In the beauty of the world rude necessity becomes an object of love . What is more beautiful than the action of weight on the fugitive waves of the sea as they fall in ever-moving folds , or the almost eternal folds of the mountains . The sea is not less beautiful in our eyes because we know that sometimes ships are wrecked . On the contrary this adds to its beauty . If it altered the movement of its waves to spare a boat , it would be a creature gifted with discernment and choice and not this fluid , perfectly obedient to every external pressure . It is this perfect obedience which constitutes the sea ’ s beauty . All the horrors which come about in this world are like the folds imposed upon the waves by gravity . That is why they contain an element of beauty . Sometimes a poem such as the Iliad , brings this beauty to light . Men can never escape from obedience to God . A creature can-not but obey . The only choice given to men , as intelligent and free creatures , is to desire obedience or not to desire it . If a man does not desire it , he obeys nevertheless , perpetually , in as much as he is a thing subject to mechanical necessity . If he desires it , he is still subject to mechanical necessity , but a new necessity is added to it , a necessity constituted by laws belonging to supernatural things . Certain actions become impossible for him , others are done by his agency , sometimes almost in spite of himself . When we have the feeling that on some occasion we have disobeyed God , it simply means that for a time we have ceased to desire obedience . Of course it must be understood that , where everything else is equal , a man does not perform the same actions if he gives his consent to obedience as if he does not ; just as a plant , where everything else is equal , does not grow in the same way if it is in the light as if it is in the dark . The plant does not have any control or choice in the matter of its own growth . As for us , we are like plants which have the one choice of being in or out of the light . Christ proposed the docility of matter to us as a model when he told us to consider the lilies of the field which neither toil nor spin . This means that they have not set out to clothe themselves in this or that colour , they have not exercised their will nor made arrangements to bring about their object , they have received all that natural necessity brought them . If they appear to be infinitely more beautiful than the richest stuffs , it is not because they are richer but as a result of their docility . Materials are docile too , but docile to man , not to God . Matter is not beautiful when it obeys man , but only when it obeys God . If sometimes in a work of art it seems almost as beautiful as it is in the sea , the mountains or flowers , it is because the light of God has filled the artist . In order to find things beautiful which are manufactured by men uninspired by God , it would be necessary for us to have understood with our whole soul that these men themselves are only matter which obeys without knowing it . For anyone who has arrived at this point , absolutely everything here below is perfectly beautiful . In everything which exists , in everything which comes about , he discerns the mechanism of necessity , and he appreciates in necessity the infinite sweetness of obedience . For us , this obedience of things in relation to God is what the transparency of a window pane is in relation to light . As soon as we feel this obedience with our whole being , we see God . When we hold a newspaper upside down , we see the strange shapes of the printed characters . When we turn it the right way up , we no longer see the characters , we see words . The passenger on board a boat caught in a storm feels each jolt as an inward upheaval . The captain is only aware of the complex combination of the wind , the current and the swell , with the position of the boat , its shape , its sails , its rudder . As one has to learn to read , or to practise a trade , so one must learn to feel in all things , first and almost solely , the obedience of the universe to God . It is really an apprenticeship . Like every apprenticeship , it requires time and effort . He who has reached the end of his training realises that the differences between things or between events are no more important than those recognised by someone who knows how to read , when he has before him the same sentence reproduced several times , written in red ink and blue , and printed in this , that , or the other kind of lettering . He who does not know how to read only sees the differences . For him who knows how to read , it all comes to the same thing , since the sentence is identical . Whoever has finished his apprenticeship recognises things and events , everywhere and always , as vibrations of the same divine and infinitely sweet word . This does not mean that he will not suffer . Pain is the colour of certain events . When a man who can and a man who can not read look at a sentence written in red ink , they both see the same red colour , but this colour is not so important for the one as for the other . When an apprentice gets hurt , or complains of being tired , the workmen and peasants have this fine expression : ‘ It is the trade which is entering his body. ’ Each time that we have some pain to go through , we can say to ourselves quite truly that it is the universe , the order and beauty of the world , and the obedience of creation to God which are entering our body . After that how can we fail to bless with tenderest gratitude the Love which sends us this gift ? Joy and suffering are two equally precious gifts which must both of them be savoured to the full , each one in its purity without trying to mix them . Through joy , the beauty of the world penetrates our soul . Through suffering it penetrates our body . We could no more become friends of God through joy alone than one becomes a ship ’ s captain by studying books on navigation . The body plays a part in all apprenticeships . On the plane of physical sensibility , suffering alone gives us contact with that necessity which constitutes the order of the world , for pleasure does not involve an impression of necessity . It is a higher kind of sensibility which is capable of recognising a necessity in joy , and that only indirectly through a sense of beauty . In order that our being should one day become wholly sensitive in every part to this obedience which is the substance of matter , in order that a new sense should be formed in us which enables us to hear the universe as the vibration of the word of God , the transforming power of suffering and of joy are equally indispensable . When either of them comes to us we have to open the very centre of our soul to it , just as a woman opens her door to messengers from her loved one . What does it matter to a lover if the messenger be polite or rough , so long as he gives her a message ? But affliction is not suffering . Affliction is something quite distinct from a method of God ’ s teaching . The infinity of space and time separates us from God . How are we to seek for him ? How are we to go towards him ? Even if we were to walk for hundreds of years , we should do no more than go round and round the world . Even in an aeroplane we could not do anything else . We are incapable of progressing vertically . We can not take a step towards the heavens . God crosses the universe and comes to us . Over the infinity of space and time , the infinitely more infinite love of God comes to possess us . He comes at his own time . We have the power to consent to receive him or to refuse . If we remain deaf , he comes back again and again like a beggar , but also , like a beggar , one day he stops coming . If we consent , God puts a little seed in us and he goes away again . From that moment God has no more to do ; neither have we , except to wait . We only have not to regret the consent we gave him , the nuptial yes . It is not as easy as it seems , for the growth of the seed within us is painful . Moreover from the very fact that we accept this growth , we can not avoid destroying whatever gets in its way , pulling up the weeds , cutting the couch-grass , and unfortunately the couch-grass is part of our very flesh , so that this gardening amounts to a violent operation . On the whole , however , the seed grows of itself . A day comes when the soul belongs to God , when it not only consents to love but when truly and effectively it loves . Then in its turn it must cross the universe to go to God . The soul does not love like a creature with created love . The love within it is divine , uncreated ; for it is the love of God for God which is passing through it . God alone is capable of loving God . We can only consent to give up our own feelings so as to allow free passage in our soul for this love . That is the meaning of denying oneself . We are created for this consent , and for this alone . Divine Love crossed the infinity of space and time to come from God to us . But how can it repeat the journey in the opposite direction , starting from a finite creature ? When the seed of divine love placed in us has grown and become a tree , how can we , we who bear it , take it back to its origin ? How can we make the journey which God made when he came to us , in the opposite direction ? How can we cross infinite distance ? It seems impossible , but there is a way—a way with which we are familiar . We know quite well in what likeness this tree is made , this tree which has grown within us , this most beautiful tree where the birds of the air come and perch . We know what is the most beautiful of all trees . ‘ No forest bears its equal. ’ Something still a little more frightful than a gibbet—that is the most beautiful of all trees . It was the seed of this tree that God placed within us , without our knowing what seed it was . If we had known , we should not have said yes at the first moment . It is this tree which has grown within us and which has become ineradicable . Only a betrayal could uproot it . When we hit a nail with a hammer , the whole of the shock received by the large head of the nail passes into the point without any of it being lost , although it is only a point . If the hammer and the head of the nail were infinitely big it would be just the same . The point of the nail would transmit this infinite shock at the point to which it was applied . Extreme affliction , which means physical pain , distress of soul and social degradation , all at the same time , constitutes the nail . The point is applied at the very centre of the soul . The head of the nail is all the necessity which spreads throughout the totality of space and time . Affliction is a marvel of divine technique . It is a simple and ingenious device which introduces into the soul of a finite creature the immensity of force , blind , brutal and cold . The infinite distance which separates God from the creature is entirely concentrated into one point to pierce the soul in its centre . The man to whom such a thing happens has no part in the operation . He struggles like a butterfly which is pinned alive into an album . But through all the horror he can continue to want to love . There is nothing impossible in that , no obstacle , one might almost say no difficulty . For the greatest suffering , so long as it does not cause fainting , does not touch the part of the soul which consents to a right direction . It is only necessary to know that love is a direction and not a state of the soul . If one is unaware of this , one falls into despair at the first onslaught of affliction . He whose soul remains ever turned in the direction of God while the nail pierces it , finds himself nailed on to the very centre of the universe . It is the true centre , it is not in the middle , it is beyond space and time , it is God . In a dimension which does not belong to space , which is not time , which is indeed quite a different dimension , this nail has pierced a hole through all creation , through the thickness of the screen which separates the soul from God . In this marvellous dimension , the soul , without leaving the place and the instant where the body to which it is united is situated , can cross the totality of space and time and come into the very presence of God . It is at the intersection of creation and its Creator . This point of intersection is the point of intersection of the branches of the Cross . Saint Paul was perhaps thinking about things of this kind when he said : ‘ That ye , being rooted and grounded in love , may be able to comprehend with all saints what is the breadth , and length , and depth , and height ; and to know the love of Christ , which passeth knowledge. ’ 1 1 No English word exactly conveys the meaning of the French malheur . Our word unhappiness is a negative term and far too weak . Affliction is the nearest equivalent but not quite satisfactory . Malheur has in it a sense of inevitability and doom . 1 Epistle to the Ephesians iii , 17–19 . FORMS OF THE IMPLICIT LOVE OF GOD FORMS OF THE IMPLICIT LOVE OF GOD Simone Weil sent this to Father Perrin just as she was embarking . He could not therefore read it until after she had gone and circumstances made it impossible for him to reply to the author by specifying in what respects her views differed from Catholic doctrine . Since the commandment ‘ Thou shalt love the Lord thy God ’ is laid upon us so imperatively , it is to be inferred that the love in question is not only the love which a soul can give or refuse when God comes in person to take the hand of his future bride , but also a love preceding this visit , for a permanent obligation is implied . This previous love can not have God for its object . since God is not present to the soul and has never yet been so . It must then have another object . Yet it is destined to become the love of God . We can call it the indirect or implicit love of God . This holds good even when the object of such love bears the name of God , for we can then say , either that the name is wrongly applied , or that the use of it is only permissible on account of the development which is to follow later . The implicit love of God can only have three immediate objects , the only three things here below in which God is really though secretly present . These are religious ceremonies , the beauty of the world and our neighbour . Accordingly there are three loves . To these three loves friendship should perhaps be added ; strictly speaking it is distinct from the love of our neighbour . These indirect loves have a virtue which is exactly and rigorously equivalent . It depends on circumstances , temperament and vocation which is the first to enter the soul ; one or other of them is dominant during the period of preparation . It is not necessarily the same one for the whole of this period . It is probable that in most cases the period of preparation does not draw towards its end , the soul is not ready to receive the personal visit of its Master , unless it has in it all three indirect loves to a high degree . The combination of these loves constitutes the love of God in the form best suited to the preparatory period , that is to say a veiled form . They do not disappear when the love of God in the full sense of the word wells up in the soul ; they become infinitely stronger and all loves taken together only make a single love . The veiled form of love necessarily comes first however , and often reigns alone in the soul for a very long time . Perhaps , with a great many people , it may continue to do so till death . Veiled love can reach a very high degree of purity and power . At the moment when it touches the soul , each of the forms which such love may take has the virtue of a sacrament . THE LOVE OF OUR NEIGHBOUR Christ made this clear enough with regard to the love of our neighbour . He said that he would one day thank his benefactors , saying to them ‘ I was anhungered and ye gave me meat. ’ Who but Christ himself can be Christ ’ s benefactor ? How can a man give meat to Christ , if he is not raised at least for a moment to the state spoken of by Saint Paul , when he no longer lives in himself but Christ lives in him ? The text of the Gospel is concerned only with Christ ’ s presence in the sufferer . Yet it seems as though the spiritual worthiness of him who receives has nothing to do with the matter . It must then be admitted that it is the benefactor himself , as a bearer of Christ , who causes Christ to enter the famished sufferer with the bread he gives him . The other can consent to receive this presence or not , exactly like the person who goes to communion . If the gift is rightly given and rightly received the passing of a morsel of bread from one man to another is something like a real communion . Christ does not call his benefactors loving or charitable . He calls them just . The Gospel makes no distinction between the love of our neighbour and justice . In the eyes of the Greeks also a respect for Zeus the suppliant was the first duty of justice . We have invented the distinction between justice and charity . It is easy to understand why . Our notion of justice dispenses him who possesses from the obligation of giving . If he gives all the same , he thinks he has a right to be pleased with himself . He thinks he has done a good work . As for him who receives , it depends on the way he interprets this notion whether he is dispensed from all gratitude , or whether it obliges him to offer servile thanks . Only the absolute identification of justice and love makes the co-existence possible of compassion and gratitude on the one hand , and , on the other , of respect for the dignity of affliction in the afflicted—a respect felt by the sufferer himself and the others . It has to be recognised that no kindness can go further than justice without constituting a fault under a false appearance of kindness . But the just must be thanked for being just , because justice is so beautiful a thing , in the same way as we thank God because of his great glory . Any other gratitude is servile and even animal . The only difference between the man who witnesses an act of justice and the man who receives a material advantage from it is that in such circumstances the beauty of justice is only a spectacle for the first , while for the second it is the object of a contact and even a kind of nourishment . Thus the feeling which is simple admiration in the first should be carried to a far higher degree in the second by the fire of gratitude . To be ungrateful when we have been treated with justice , in circumstances where injustice is easily possible , is to deprive ourselves of the supernatural and sacramental virtue contained in every pure act of justice . Nothing better enables us to form a conception of this virtue than the doctrine of natural justice as we find it set forth with an incomparable integrity of spirit in a few marvellous lines of Thucydides . The Athenians , who were at war with Sparta , wanted to force the inhabitants of the little island of Melos , allied to Sparta from all antiquity and so far remaining neutral , to join with them . It was in vain that the men of Melos , faced with the ultimatum of the Athenians , invoked justice , imploring pity for the antiquity of their town . As they would not give in , the Athenians razed their city to the ground , put all their men to death and sold all their women and children as slaves . Thucydides has put the lines in question into the mouth of these Athenians . They begin by saying that they will not try to prove that their ultimatum is just . ‘ Let us treat rather of what is possible… You know it as well as we do ; the human spirit is so constituted that what is just is only examined if there is equal necessity on both sides . But if one is strong and the other weak , that which is possible is imposed by the first and accepted by the second. ’ The men of Melos said that in the case of a battle they would have the gods with them on account of the justice of their cause . The Athenians replied that they saw no reason to suppose so . ‘ As touching the gods we have the belief , and as touching men the certainty , that always , by a necessity of nature , each one commands wherever he has the power . We did not establish this law , we are not the first to apply it ; we found it already established , we abide by it as something likely to endure for ever ; and that is why we apply it . We know quite well that you also , like all the others , once you reached the same degree of power , would act in the same way. ’ Such lucidity of mind in the conception of injustice is the light which comes immediately below that of charity . It is the clarity which sometimes remains where charity once existed but has become extinguished . Below comes the darkness in which the strong sincerely believe that their cause is more just than that of the weak . That was the case with the Romans and the Hebrews . Possibility and necessity are terms opposed to justice in these lines . Possible means all that the strong can impose upon the weak . It is reasonable to examine how far this possibility goes . Supposing it to be known , it is certain that the strong will accomplish his purpose to the extreme limit of possibility . It is a mechanical necessity . Otherwise it would be as though he willed and did not will simultaneously . There is a necessity for the strong as well as the weak in this . When two human beings have to settle something and neither has the power to impose anything on the other , they have to come to an understanding . Then justice is consulted , for justice alone has the power to make two wills coincide . It is the image of that Love which in God unites the Father and Son , and which is the common thought of separate thinkers . But when there is a strong and a weak there is no need to unite their wills . There is only one will , that of the strong . The weak obeys . Everything happens just as it does when a man is handling matter . There are not two wills to be made to coincide . The man wills and the matter submits . The weak are like things . There is no difference between throwing a stone to get rid of a troublesome dog and saying to a slave : ‘ Chase that dog away. ’ Beyond a certain degree of inequality in the relations of men of unequal strength , the weaker passes into the state of matter and loses his personality . The men of old used to say : ‘ A man loses half his soul the day he becomes a slave. ’ The even balance , an image of equal relations of strength , was the symbol of justice from all antiquity , specially in Egypt . It may have had a religious purpose before being used for commerce . Its use in trade is the image of the mutual consent , the very essence of justice , which should be the rule in exchanges . The definition of justice as being made up of mutual consent , which is found in the legislation of Sparta , probably originated in the Aegeo-Cretan civilisation . The supernatural virtue of justice consists of behaving exactly as though there were equality when one is the stronger in an unequal relationship . Exactly , in every respect , including the slightest details of accent and attitude , for a detail may be enough to place the weaker party in the condition of matter which on this occasion naturally belongs to him , just as the slightest shock causes water which has remained liquid below freezing point to solidify . Supernatural virtue , for the inferior thus treated , consists in not believing that there really is equality of strength , and in recognising that his treatment is due solely to the generosity of the other party . That is what is called gratitude . For the inferior treated in a different way , the supernatural virtue of justice consists in understanding that the treatment he is under-going , though on the one hand differing from justice , on the other is in conformity with necessity and the mechanism of human nature . He should avoid both submission and revolt . He who treats as equals those who are far below him in strength really makes them a gift of the quality of human beings , of which fate had deprived them . As far as it is possible for a creature , he reproduces the original generosity of the Creator with regard to them . This is the most Christian of virtues . It is also the virtue which the Egyptian Book of the Dead describes in words as sublime even as those of the Gospel . ‘ I have never caused anyone to weep . I have never spoken with a haughty voice . I have never made anyone afraid . I have never been deaf to words of justice and truth. ’ Gratitude on the part of the unfortunate , when it is pure , is but a participation in this same virtue , for only he who is capable of it can recognise it . Others experience the results of it without any recognition . Such virtue is identical with real , active faith in the true God . The Athenians of Thucydides thought that divinity , like humanity in its natural state , always carried its power of commanding to the extreme limit of possibility . The true God is the God we think of as almighty , but as not exercising his power everywhere , for he is only found in the heavens or in secret here below . Those of the Athenians who massacred the inhabitants of Melos had no longer any idea of such a God . The first proof that they were in the wrong lies in the fact that , contrary to their assertion , it happens , although extremely rarely , that a man will forbear out of pure generosity to command where he has the power to do so . That which is possible for man is possible also for God . The examples of this may be challenged , but it is certain that if in one or another example it can be proved that the sole motive is pure generosity , such generosity will be generally admired . All that man is capable of admiring is possible with God . The spectacle of this world is another , more certain proof . Pure goodness is not anywhere to be found in it . Either God is not almighty or he is not absolutely good , or else he does not command everywhere where he has the power to do so . Thus the existence of evil here below , far from disproving the reality of God is the very thing which reveals him in his truth . On God ’ s part creation is not an act of self-expansion but of restraint and renunciation . God and all his creatures are less than God alone . God accepted this diminution . He emptied a part of his being from himself . He had already emptied himself in this act of his divinity ; that is why Saint John says that the Lamb had been slain from the beginning of the world . God permitted the existence of things distinct from himself and worth infinitely less than himself . By this creative act he denied himself , as Christ has told us to deny ourselves . God denied himself for our sakes in order to give us the possibility of denying ourselves for him . This response , this echo , which it is in our power to refuse , is the only possible justification for the folly of love of the creative act . The religions which have a conception of this renunciation , this voluntary distance , this voluntary effacement of God , his apparent absence and his secret presence here below , these religions are true religion , the translation into different languages of the great Revelation . The religions which represent divinity as commanding wherever it has the power to do so are false . Even though they are monotheistic they are idolatrous . He who , being reduced by affliction to the state of an inert and passive thing , returns , at least for a time , to the state of a human being , through the generosity of others , such a one , if he knows how to accept and feel the true essence of this generosity , receives at the very instant a soul begotten exclusively of charity . He is born from on high of water and of the Spirit . ( The word in the Gospel , anothen , means from on high more often than again . ) To treat our neighbour who is in affliction with love is something like baptising him . He from whom the act of generosity proceeds can only behave as he does if his thought transports him into the other . At such a moment he also consists only of water and of the Spirit . Generosity and compassion are inseparable , and both have their model in God , that is to say in creation and in the Passion . Christ taught us that the supernatural love of our neighbour is the exchange of compassion and gratitude which happens in a flash between two beings , one possessing and the other deprived of human personality . One of the two is only a little piece of flesh , naked , inert and bleeding beside a ditch ; he is nameless , no one knows anything about him . Those who pass by this thing scarcely notice it , and a few minutes afterwards do not even know that they saw it . Only one stops and turns his attention towards it . The actions that follow are just the automatic effect of this moment of attention . The attention is creative . But at the moment when it is engaged it is a renunciation . This is true , at least , if it is pure . The man accepts to be diminished by concentrating on an expenditure of energy , which will not extend his own power but will only give existence to a being other than himself , who will exist independently of him . Still more , to desire the existence of the other is to transport himself into him by sympathy , and , as a result , to have a share in the state of inert matter which is his . Such an operation goes equally against the nature of a man who has not known affliction and is ignorant of its meaning , and a man who has known or had a foretaste of affliction and whom it fills with horror . It is not surprising that a man who has bread should give a piece to someone who is starving . What is surprising is that he should be capable of doing so with so different a gesture from that with which we buy an object . Almsgiving when it is not supernatural is like a sort of purchase . It buys the sufferer . Whatever a man may want , in cases of crime as in those of the highest virtue , in the minutest preoccupations as in the greatest designs , the essence of his desire always consists in this , that he wants above all things to be able to exercise his will freely . To wish for the existence of this free consent in another , deprived of it by affliction , is to transport oneself into him , it is to consent to affliction oneself , that is to say to the destruc tion of oneself . It is to deny oneself . In denying oneself , one becomes capable under God of establishing someone else by a creative affirmation . One gives oneself in ransom for the other . It is a redemptive act . The sympathy of the weak for the strong is natural , for the weak in putting himself into the place of the other acquires an imaginary strength . The sympathy of the strong for the weak , being in the opposite direction , is against nature . That is why the sympathy of the weak for the strong is only pure if its sole object is the sympathy received from the other , when the other is truly generous . This is supernatural gratitude , which means gladness to be the recipient of supernatural compassion . It leaves self-respect absolutely intact . The preservation of true self-respect in affliction is also some-thing supernatural . Gratitude which is pure , like pure compassion , is essentially the acceptance of affliction . The afflicted man and his benefactor , between whom diversity of fortune places an infinite distance , are united in this acceptance . There is friendship between them in the sense of the Pythagoreans , miraculous harmony and equality . Both of them recognise at the same time , with all their soul , that it is better not to command wherever one has power to do so . If this thought fills the whole soul and controls the imagination , which is the source of our actions , it constitutes true faith . For it places the Good outside this world , where are all the sources of power ; it recognises it as the archetype of the secret point which lies at the centre of human personality and which is the princple of renunciation . Even in art and science , though second-class work , brilliant or mediocre , is an extension of the self , work of the very highest order , true creation , means self-loss . We do not perceive this truth , because fame confuses and covers with its glory achievements of the highest order and the most brilliant productions of the second class , often giving the advantage to the latter . Love for our neighbour , being made of creative attention , is analogous to genius . Creative attention means really giving our attention to what does not exist . Humanity does not exist in the anonymous flesh lying inert by the road-side . The Samaritan who stops and looks gives his attention all the same to this humanity which is absent and the actions which follow prove that it is a question of real attention . ‘ Faith , ’ says Saint Paul , ‘ is the evidence of things not seen. ’ 1 In this moment of attention faith is present as much as love . In the same way a man who is entirely at the disposal of others does not exist . A slave does not exist either in the eyes of his master or his own . When the negro slaves in America accidentally hurt their feet or their hands , they used to say : ‘ It does not matter , it is the master ’ s foot , the master ’ s hand. ’ He who has absolutely no belongings of any kind around which social consideration crystalises does not exist . A popular Spanish song says in words of marvellous truth : ‘ lf anyone wants to make himself invisible , there is no surer way than to become poor. ’ Love sees what is invisible . God thought that which did not exist , and by this thought brought it into being . At each moment we only exist because God consents to think us into being , although really we have no existence . At any rate that is how we represent creation to ourselves , humanly and hence inadequately of course , but this imagery contains an element of truth . God alone has this power , the power really to think into being that which does not exist . Only God , present in us , can really think the human quality into the victims of affliction , can really look at them with a look differing from that we give to things , can listen to their voice as we listen to spoken words . Then they become aware that they have a voice , otherwise they would not have occasion to notice it . Difficult as it is really to listen to someone in affliction , it is just as difficult for him to know that compassion is listening to him . The love of our neighbour is the love which comes down from God to man . It precedes that which rises from men to God . God is longing to come down to those in affliction . As soon as a soul is disposed to consent , though it were the last , the most miserable , the most deformed of souls , God will precipitate himself into it in order , through it , to look at and listen to the afflicted . Only as time passes does the soul become aware that he is there . But , though it finds no name for him , wherever the afflicted are loved for themselves alone , it is God who is present . God is not present , even if we invoke him , where the afflicted are merely regarded as an occasion for doing good . They may even be loved on this account , but then they are in their natural rôle , the rôle of matter and of things . We have to bring to them in their inert , anonymous condition a personal love . That is why expressions such as to love our neighbour in God , or for God , are misleading and equivocal . A man has all he can do , even if he concentrates all the attention of which he is capable , to look at this small inert thing of flesh , lying stripped of clothing by the road-side . It is not the time to turn his thoughts towards God . Just as there are times when we must think of God and forget all creatures without exception , there are times when , as we look at creatures , we do not have to think explicitly of God . At such times , the presence of God in us has as its condition a secret so deep that it is even a secret from us . There are times when thinking of God separates us from him . Modesty is the condition of nuptial union . In true love it is not we who love the afflicted in God , it is God in us who loves them . When we are in affliction , it is God in us who loves those who wish us well . Compassion and gratitude come down from God , and when they are exchanged in a glance , God is present at the point where the eyes of those who give and those who receive meet . The sufferer and the other love each other , starting from God , through God , but not for the love of God ; they love each other for the love of the one for the other . This is an impossibility . That is why it only comes about through the agency of God . He who gives bread to the famished sufferer for the love of God will not be thanked by Christ . He has already had his reward in this thought itself . Christ thanks those who do not know to whom they are giving food . Moreover , giving is only one of the two possible forms which love for the afflicted may take . Power always means power to do good or to hurt . In a relationship where the strength is very unequally divided , the superior can be just towards the inferior either in doing him good with justice or in hurting him with justice . In the first case we have almsgiving , in the second punishment . Just punishment , like just almsgiving , enshrines the real presence of God and constitutes something in the nature of a sacrament . That also is made quite clear in the Gospel . It is expressed by the words : ‘ He that is without sin among you let him first cast a stone. ’ Christ alone is without sin . Christ spared the woman taken in adultery . The administration of punishment was not in accordance with the earthly life which was to end on the Cross . He did not however prescribe the abolition of penal justice . He allowed stoning to continue . Wherever it is done with justice , it is therefore he who throws the first stone . As he dwells in the famished wretch whom a just man feeds , so he dwells in the condemned wretch whom a just man punishes . He did not say so , but he showed it clearly enough by dying like a common criminal . He is the divine model of prisoners and old offenders . As the young working men of the J.O.C.1 thrill at the thought that Christ is one of them , so condemned criminals have just reason to taste a like rapture . They only need to be told , as the working men were told . In a sense Christ is nearer to them than to the martyrs . The stone which slays and the piece of bread which provides nourishment have exactly the same virtue if Christ is present at the start and the finish . The gift of life and the gift of death are equivalent . According to the Hindu tradition , King Rama , the incarnation of the second Person of the Trinity , was obliged , much to his regret , to avoid scandal among his people by executing a man of low caste who had broken the law through giving himself up to the ascetic practice of religion . The King went himself to find the man and slew him with a stroke of his sword . Immediately afterwards the soul of the dead man appeared to him and fell at his feet , thanking him for the degree of glory conferred upon him by the contact of this blessed sword . Thus the execution , although quite unjust in one sense , but legal and carried out by the very hand of God , had had in it all the virtue of a sacrament . The legal character of a punishment has no true significance if it does not give it some kind of religious meaning , if it does not make of it the analogy of a sacrament ; and therefore all penal offices , from that of the judge to that of the executioner and the prison guard , should in some sort share in the priestly office . Justice in punishment can be defined in the same way as justice in almsgiving . It means giving our attention to the victim of affliction as to a being and not a thing ; it means wishing to preserve in him the faculty of free consent . Men think they are despising crime when they are really despising the weakness of affliction . A being in whom the two are combined affords them an opportunity of giving free play to their contempt for affliction on the pretext that they are scorning crime . He is thus the object of the greatest contempt . Contempt is the contrary of attention . There are exceptions only where there is a crime which for some reason has prestige , as is often the case with murder on account of the fleeting moment of power which it implies , or where the crime does not make a very vivid impression upon those who assess its culpability . Stealing is the crime most devoid of prestige , and it causes most indignation because property is the thing to which people are most generally and powerfully attached . That is apparent even in the penal code . No state is beneath that of a human being enveloped in a cloud of guilt , be it true or false , and entirely in the power of a few men who are to decide his fate with a word . These men do not pay any attention to him . Moreover , from the moment when anyone falls into the hands of the law with all its penal machinery until the moment he is free again—and those known as hardened criminals are like prostitutes , in that they hardly ever do get free until the day of their death—such a one is never an object of attention . Everything combines , down to the smallest details , down even to the inflections of people ’ s voices , to make him seem vile and outcast in all men ’ s eyes including his own . The brutality and flippancy , the terms of scorn and the jokes , the way of speaking , the way of listening and of not listening , all these things are equally effective . There is no intentional unkindness in it all . It is the automatic effect of a professional life which has as its object crime seen in the form of affliction , that is to say in the form where horror and defilement are exposed in their nakedness . Such a contact , being uninterrupted , necessarily contaminates , and the form this contamination takes is contempt . It is this contempt which is reflected on every prisoner at the bar . The penal apparatus is like a transmitter which turns the whole volume of defilement contained in all the circles where the miserable crime is to be found , upon each accused person . The mere contact with this penal apparatus causes a kind of horror in that part of the soul which has remained intact , and the horror is in exact proportion to the innocence . Those who are completely rotten receive no injury and do not suffer . It can not be otherwise , if there is not something between the penal apparatus and the crime which is capable of cleansing defilement . This can only be God . Infinite purity alone is not contaminated by contact with evil . All finite purity becomes defilement itself through prolonged contact . However the code may be reformed , punishment can not be humane unless it passes through Christ . The severity of the sentence is not the most important thing . Under present conditions , a condemned man , although guilty and given a punishment which is relatively light in view of his offence , can more often than not be rightly considered as having been the victim of a cruel injustice . What is important is that the punishment should be legitimate , that is to say that it should proceed directly from the law . It is important that the law should be recognised as having a divine character , not because of its content but because it is law . It is important that the whole organisation of penal justice should be directed towards obtaining from the magistrates and their assistants the attention and respect for the accused which is due from every man to whoever may be in his power , and from the accused his consent to the punishment which is inflicted , a consent of which the innocent Christ has given us the perfect model . A death sentence for a slight offence , pronounced in such a way , would be less horrible than a sentence of six months in prison given as it is at the present day . Nothing is more frightful than the spectacle , now so frequent , of an accused , whose situation provides him with nothing to fall back upon but his own words , and who is incapable of arranging these words because of his social origin and lack of culture , as he stands broken down by guilt , affliction and fear , stammering before judges who are not listening and who interrupt him in tones of ostentatious refinement . For as long as affliction is to be found in society , for as long as legal or private almsgiving and punishment are inevitable , the separation between civil institutions and religious life will be a crime . The lay conception considered alone is completely false . It only has some excuse as a reaction against a totalitarian religion . In that respect , it must be admitted , it is partly justifiable . In order to be present everywhere , as it should , religion must not only not be totalitarian , but it must limit itself strictly to the plane of supernatural love which alone is suitable for it . If it did so it would penetrate everywhere . The Bible says : ‘ Wisdom penetrates everywhere on account of its perfect purity. ’ Through the absence of Christ , mendicity , in the widest sense of the word , and penal action are perhaps the most frightful things on earth ; two things which are almost infernal . They have the very colour of hell . Prostitution might be added to them , for it is to real marriage what almsgiving and punishment without charity are to almsgiving and punishment which are just . Men have received the power to do good or harm not only to the body but to the souls of their fellows ; to the whole soul of those in whom God is not present , and to all that part of the soul uninhabited by God of the others . A man may be indwelt by God , by the power of evil or merely by the mechanism of the flesh . When he gives or punishes , what he bears within him enters the soul of the other through the bread or the sword . The substance of the bread and the sword are virgin , empty of good and of evil , equally capable of conveying one or the other . He who is forced by affliction to receive bread or to suffer chastisement has his soul exposed naked and defenceless both to evil and to good . There is only one way of never receiving anything but good . It is to know , with our whole soul and not just abstractly , that men who are not animated by pure charity are merely wheels in the mechanism of the order of the world , like inert matter . After that we see that everything comes directly from God , either through the love of a man , or through the lifelessness of matter , whether it be tangible or psychic ; through spirit or water . All that increases the vital energy in us is like the bread for which Christ thanks the just . All the blows , the wounds and the mutilations are like a stone thrown at us by the hand of Christ . Bread and stone both come from Christ and penetrating to our inward being bring Christ into us . Bread and stone are love . We must eat the bread and lay ourselves open to the stone , so that it may sink as deeply as possible into our flesh . If we have any armour which is able to protect our soul from the stones thrown by Christ , we should take it off and cast it away . LOVE OF THE ORDER OF THE WORLD The love of the order and beauty of the world is thus the complement of the love of our neighbour . It proceeds from the same renunciation , the renunciation which is an image of the creative renunciation of God . God causes this universe to exist , but he consents not to command it , although he has the power to do so . Instead he leaves two other forces to rule in his place . On the one hand there is the blind necessity attaching to matter , including the psychic matter of the soul , and on the other the autonomy essential to thinking persons . By loving our neighbour we imitate the divine love which created us and all our fellows . By loving the order of the world we imitate the divine love which created this universe of which we are a part . Man does not have to renounce the command of matter and of souls , since he does not possess the power to command them . But God has conferred upon him an imaginary likeness of this power , an imaginary divinity , so that he also , although a creature , may empty himself of his divinity . Just as God , being outside the universe , is at the same time the centre , so each man imagines he is situated in the centre of the world . The illusion of perspective places him at the centre of space ; an illusion of the same kind falsifies his idea of time ; and yet another kindred illusion arranges a whole hierarchy of values around him . This illusion is extended even to our sense of existence , on account of the intimate connection between our sense of value and our sense of being ; being seems to us less and less concentrated the further it is removed from us . We relegate the spatial form of this illusion to the place where it belongs , the realm of the imagination . We are obliged to do so , otherwise we should not perceive a single object , we should not even be able to direct ourselves enough to take a single step consciously . God thus provides us with a model of the operation which should transform all our soul . In the same way as in our infancy we learn to control and check this illusion in our sense of space , we should control and check it in our sense of time , values and being . Otherwise from every point of view except that of space we shall be incapable of discerning a single object or directing a single step . We live in a world of unreality and dreams . To give up our imaginary position as the centre , to renounce it , not only intellectually but in the imaginative part of our soul , that means to awaken to what is real and eternal , to see the true light and hear the true silence . A transformation then takes place at the very roots of our sensibility , in our immediate reception of sense impressions and psychological impressions . It is a transformation analogous to that which takes place in the dusk of evening on a road , where we suddenly discern as a tree what we had at first seen as a stooping man ; or where we suddenly recognise as a rustling of leaves what we thought at first was whispering voices . We see the same colours , we hear the same sounds , but not in the same way . To empty ourselves of our false divinity , to deny ourselves , to give up being the centre of the world in imagination , to discern that all points in the world are equally centres and that the true centre is outside the world , this is to consent to the rule of mechanical necessity in matter and of free choice at the centre of each soul . Such consent is love . The face of this love which is turned towards thinking persons is the love of our neighbour ; the face turned towards matter is love of the order of the world , or love of the beauty of the world which is the same thing . In ancient times the love of the beauty of the world had a very important place in men ’ s thoughts and surrounded the whole of life with marvellous poetry . This was the case in every nation ; in China , in India and in Greece . The Stoicism of the Greeks which was very wonderful and to which primitive Christianity was infinitely close , especially in the writings of Saint John , was almost exclusively the love of the beauty of the world . As for Israel , certain parts of the Old Testament , the Psalms , the Book of Job , Isaiah and the Book of Wisdom , contain an incomparable expression of the beauty of the world . The example of Saint Francis shows how great a place the beauty of the world can have in Christian thought . Not only is his actual poem perfect poetry , but all his life was perfect poetry in action . His very choice of places for solitary retreats or for the foundations of his convents was in itself the most beautiful poetry in action . Vagabondage and poverty were poetry with him ; he stripped himself naked in order to have immediate contact with the beauty of the world . Saint John of the Cross also has some beautiful lines about the beauty of the world . But in general , making suitable reservations for the treasures which are unknown , little known or perhaps buried among the forgotten remains of the Middle Ages , we might say that the beauty of the world is almost absent from the Christian tradition . This is strange . It is difficult to understand . It leaves a terrible gap . How can Christianity call itself catholic if the universe itself is left out ? It is true that there is little mention of the beauty of the world in the Gospel . But in so short a text which , as Saint John says , is very far from containing all that Christ taught , the disciples no doubt thought it unnecessary to put anything so generally accepted . It does however come up on two occasions . Once Christ tells us to contemplate and imitate the lilies of the field and the birds of the air , in their indifference as to the future and their docile acceptance of destiny ; and another time he invites us to contemplate and imitate the indiscriminate distribution of rain and sunlight . The Renaissance thought to renew its spiritual links with anriquity by passing over Christianity , but it hardly took anything but the secondary products of ancient civilisation , art , science and curiosity regarding human things . It scarcely touched the fringe of the central inspiration . It failed to rediscover any link with the beauty of the world . In the XIth and XIIth centuries there had been the beginning of a Renaissance which would have been the real one if it had been able to bear fruit ; it began to germinate notably in Languedoc . Some of the Troubador poems on spring lead one to think that perhaps Christian inspiration and the beauty of the world would not have been separated had it developed . Moreover the spirit of Languedoc left its mark on Italy and was perhaps not unrelated to the Franciscan inspiration . But , whether it be coincidence or more probably the connection of cause and effect , these germs did not survive the war of the Albigenses and only traces of the movement were found after that . Today one might think that the white races had almost lost all feeling for the beauty of the world , and that they had taken upon them the task of making it disappear from all the continents where they have penetrated with their armies , their trade and their religion . As Christ said to the Pharisees : ‘ Woe to you , for ye have taken away the key of knowledge ; ye entered not in yourselves and them that were entering in ye hindered. ’ 1 And yet at the present time , in the countries of the white races , the beauty of the world is almost the only way by which we can allow God to penetrate us , for we are still further removed from the other two . Real love and respect for religious practices are rare even among those who are most assidious in observing them , and are practically never to be found in others . Most people do not even conceive them to be possible . As regards the supernatural purpose of affliction , compassion and gratitude are not only rare but have become almost unintelligible for almost everyone today . The very idea of them has almost disappeared ; the very meaning of the words has been debased . On the other hand a sense of beauty , although mutilated , distorted and soiled , remains rooted in the heart of man as a powerful incentive . It is present in all the preoccupations of secular life . If it were made true and pure it would sweep all secular life in a body to the feet of God , it would make the total incarnation of the faith possible . Moreover , speaking generally , the beauty of the world is the commonest , easiest and most natural way of approach . Just as God hastens into every soul immediately it opens , even a little , in order through it to love and serve the afflicted , so he descends in all haste to love and admire the tangible beauty of his own creation through the soul that opens to him . But the contrary is still more true . The soul ’ s natural inclination to love beauty is the trap God most frequently uses in order to win it and open it to the breath from on high . This was the trap which enticed Cora . All the heavens above were smiling at the scent of the narcissus , so was the entire earth and all the swelling ocean . Hardly had the poor girl stretched out her hand before she was caught in the trap . She fell into the hands of the living God . When she escaped she had eaten the seed of the pomegranate which bound her for ever . She was no longer a virgin ; she was the spouse of God . The beauty of the world is the mouth of a labyrinth . The unwary individual who on entering takes a few steps , is soon unable to find the opening . Worn out , with nothing to eat or drink , in the dark , separated from his dear ones , and from everything he loves and is accustomed to , he walks on without knowing anything or hoping anything , incapable even of discovering whether he is really going forward or merely turning round on the same spot . But this affliction is as nothing compared with the danger which threatens him . For if he does not lose courage , if he goes on walking , it is absolutely certain that he will finally arrive at the centre of the labyrinth . And there God is waiting to eat him . Later he will go out again , but he will be changed , he will have become different , after being eaten and digested by God . Afterwards he will stay near the entrance so that he can gently push all those who come near into the opening . The beauty of the world is not an attribute of matter in itself . It is a relationship of the world to our sensibility , the sensibility which depends upon the structure of our body and our soul . The Micromegas of Voltaire , a thinking infusorian organism , could have had no access to the beauty on which we live in the universe . We must have faith that , supposing such creatures were to exist , the world would be beautiful for them too ; but it would be beautiful in another way . Anyhow we must have faith that the universe is beautiful on all levels , and more generally that it has a fullness of beauty in relation to the bodily and psychic structure of each of the thinking beings which actually do exist and of all those which are possible . It is this very agreement of an infinity of perfect beauties which gives a transcendant character to the beauty of the world . Nevertheless the part of this beauty which we experience is designed and destined for our human sensibility . The beauty of the world is the co-operation of divine wisdom in creation . ‘ Zeus made all things , ’ says an Orphic line , ‘ and Bacchus perfected them. ’ This perfecting is the creation of beauty . God created the universe and his Son , our first-born brother , created the beauty of it for us . The beauty of the world is Christ ’ s tender smile for us coming through matter . He is really present in the universal beauty . The love of this beauty proceeds from God dwelling in our souls and goes out to God present in the universe . It also is like a sacrament . This is only true of universal beauty . With the exception of God , nothing short of the universe as a whole can with complete accuracy be called beautiful . All that is in the universe and is less than the universe can only be called beautiful if we extend the word beyond its strict limits and apply it to things which share indirectly in beauty , things which are imitations of it . All these secondary kinds of beauty are of infinite value as openings on to universal beauty . But , if we stop short at them , they are , on the contrary , veils ; then they corrupt . They all have in them more or less of this temptation , but in very different degrees . There are also a number of seductive factors which have nothing whatever to do with beauty , but which cause the things in which they are present to be called beautiful through lack of discernment ; for these things attract love by fraud , and all men , even the most ignorant , even the vilest of them , know that beauty alone has a right to our love . The most truly great know it too . No man is below or above beauty . The words which express beauty come to the lips of all as soon as they want to praise what they love . Only some are more and some less able to discern it . Beauty is the only finality here below . As Kant said very aptly , it is a finality which involves no objective . A beautiful thing involves no good except itself , in its totality , as it appears to us . We are drawn towards it without knowing what to ask of it . If offers us its own existence . We do not desire anything else , we possess it , and yet we still desire something . We do not in the least know what it is . We want to get behind beauty , but it is only a surface . It is like a mirror that sends us back our own desire for goodness . It is a sphinx , an enigma , a mystery which is painfully tantalising . We should like to feed upon it but it is merely something to look at , it appears only from a certain distance . The great trouble in human life is that looking and eating are two different operations . Only beyond the sky , in the country inhabited by God , are they one and the same operation . Children feel this trouble already , when they look at a cake for a long time almost regretting that it should have to be eaten and yet are unable to help eating it . It may be that vice , depravity and crime are nearly always , or even perhaps always , in their essence , attempts to eat beauty , to eat what we should only look at . Eve began it . If she caused humanity to be lost by eating the fruit , the opposite attitude , looking at the fruit without eating it , should be what is required to save it . ‘ Two winged companions , ’ says an Upanishad , ‘ two birds are on the branch of a tree . One eats the fruit the other looks at it. ’ These two birds are the two parts of our soul . It is because beauty has no end in view that it constitutes the only finality here below . For here below there are no ends . All the things that we take for ends are means . That is an obvious truth . Money is the means of buying , power is the means of commanding . It is more or less the same for all the things that we call good . Only beauty is not the means to anything else . It alone is good in itself , but without our finding any particular good or advantage in it . It seems itself to be a promise and not a good . But it only gives itself , it never gives anything else . Nevertheless , as it is the only finality , it is present in all human pursuits . Although they are all concerned with means , for everything which exists here below is only a means , beauty sheds a lustre upon them which colours them with finality . Otherwise there could neither be desire , nor , in consequence , energy in the pursuit . For a miser after the style of Harpagon , all the beauty of the world is enshrined in gold . And it is true that gold , as a pure and shining substance , has something beautiful about it . The disappearance of gold from our currency seems to have made this form of avarice disappear too . Today those who heap up money without spending it are desirous of power . Most of those who seek riches connect the thought of luxury with them . Luxury is the finality of riches . Moreover luxury itself represents beauty for a whole class of men . It provides surroundings through which they can feel in a vague fashion that the universe is beautiful , just as Saint Francis needed to be a vagabond and a beggar in order to feel it to be beautiful . Either way would be equally legitimate if in each case the beauty of the world were experienced in an equally direct , pure and full manner ; but happily God willed that it should not be so . Poverty has a privilege . That is a dispensation of Providence without which the love of the beauty of the world might easily come into conflict with the love of our neighbour . Nevertheless , the horror of poverty—and every reduction of wealth can be felt as poverty , even its failure to increase—is essentially a horror of ugliness . The soul which is prevented by circumstances from feeling anything of the beauty of the world , even confusedly , even through what is false , is invaded to its very centre by a kind of horror . The love of power amounts to a desire to establish order among the men and things around oneself , either on a large or small scale , and this desire for order is the result of a sense of beauty . In this case , as in the case of luxury , the question is one of forcing a certain circle into a pattern suggestive of universal beauty ; this circle is limited , but the hope of increasing it indefinitely may often be present . This unsatisfied appetite , the desire to keep on increasing , is due precisely to a desire for contact with universal beauty , even though the circle we are organising is not the universe . It is not the universe and it hides it . Our immediate universe is like the scenery in a theatre . In his poem Semiramis , Valéry succeeds very well in making us feel the connection between tyranny and the love of beauty . Apart from war , the instrument for increasing his power , Louis XIV was only interested in festivals and architecture Moreover war itself , especially as conducted in the old days , stirs man ’ s sense of beauty in a way that is vital and poignant . Art is an attempt to transport into a limited quantity of matter , modelled by man , an image of the infinite beauty of the entire universe . If the attempt succeeds , this portion of matter should not hide the universe , but on the contrary it should reveal its reality to all around . Works of art which are neither pure and true reflections of the beauty of the world nor openings on to this beauty , are not strictly speaking beautiful ; their authors may be very talented but they lack real genius . That is true of a great many works of art which are among the most celebrated and the most highly praised . Every true artist has had real , direct and immediate contact with the beauty of the world , contact which is of the nature of a sacrament . God has inspired every first-rate work of art , though its subject may be utterly and entirely secular ; he has not inspired any of the others . Indeed the lustre of beauty which distinguishes some of those others may quite well be a diabolical lustre . Science has as its object the study and the theoretical reconstruction of the order of the world—the order of the world in relation to the mental , psychic and bodily structure of man . Contrary to the naïve illusions of certain scholars , neither the use of telescopes and microscopes , nor the employment of most unusual algebraical formulae , nor even a contempt for the principle of non-contradiction , will allow it to get beyond the limits of this structure . Moreover it is not desirable that it should . The object of science is the presence of Wisdom in the universe , Wisdom of which we are the brodiers , the presence of Christ , expressed through matter which constitutes the world . We reconstruct for ourselves the order of the world in an image , starting from limited countable and strictly defined data . We work out a system for ourselves , establishing connections and conceiving of relationships between terms which are abstract and for that reason possible for us to deal with . Thus in an image , an image of which the very existence hangs upon an act of our attention , we can contemplate the necessity which is the substance of the universe but which , as such , only manifests itself to us by the blows it deals . We can not contemplate without a certain love . The contemplation of this image of the order of the world constitutes a certain contact with the beauty of the world . The beauty of the world is the order of the world that is loved . Physical work is a specific contact with the beauty of the world , and can even be , in its best moments , a contact so full that no equivalent can be found elsewhere . The artist , the scholar , the philosopher , the contemplative should really admire the world and pierce through the film of unreality which veils it and makes of it , for nearly all men at nearly every moment of their lives , a dream or stage set . They ought to do this but more often than not they can not manage it . He who is aching in every limb , worn out by the effort of a day of work , that is to say a day when he has been subject to matter , bears the reality of the universe in his flesh like a thorn . The difficulty for him is to look and to love . If he succeeds , he loves the Real . That is the immense privilege God has reserved for his poor . But they scarcely ever know it . No one tells them . Excessive fatigue , harassing money worries and the lack of true culture prevent them from noticing it . A slight change in these conditions would be enough to open the door which gives them access to a treasure . It is heart-rending to see how easy it would be in many cases for men to procure a treasure for their fellows and how they allow centuries to pass without taking the trouble to do so . At the time when there was a people ’ s civilisation , of which we are today collecting the crumbs as museum pieces under the name of folk-lore , the people doubtless had access to the treasure . Mythology too , which is very closely related to folklore , testifies to it , if we can decipher the poetry it contains . Carnal love in all its forms , from the highest , that is to say true marriage or platonic love , down to the lowest , even to debauchery , has the beauty of the world as its object . The love we feel for the splendour of the heavens , the plains , the sea and the mountains , for the silence of nature which is borne in upon us by its thousands of tiny sounds , for the breath of the winds , or the warmth of the sun , this love of which every human being has at least an inkling , is an incomplete , painful love , because it is felt for things which are incapable of responding , that is to say for matter . Men want to turn this same love towards a being who is like themselves and capable of answering to their love , of saying yes , of surrendering . When the feeling for beauty happens to be associated with the sight of some human being , the transference of love is made possible , at any rate in an illusory manner . But it is all the beauty of the world , it is universal beauty , for which we yearn . This kind of transference is what all love literature expresses , from the most ancientand well-worn metaphors and comparisons to the subtle analyses of Proust . The longing to love the beauty of the world in a human being is essentially the longing for the Incarnation . It is mis-taken if it thinks it is anything else . The Incarnation alone can satisfy it . It is therefore wrong to reproach the mystics , as has been done sometimes , because they use love ’ s language . It is theirs by right . Others only borrow it . If carnal Love on all levels goes more or less directly towards beauty—and the exceptions are perhaps only apparent—it is because beauty in a human being enables the imagination to see in him something like an equivalent of the order of the world . That is why sins in this realm are serious . They constitute an offence against God from the very fact that the soul is un-consciously engaged in searching for God . Moreover they all come back to one thing and that is the more or less complete determination to dispense with consent . To be completely determined to dispense with it is perhaps the most frightful of all crimes . What can be more horrible than not to respect the consent of a being in whom one is seeking , though unconsciously , for an equivalent of God ? It is still a crime , though a less serious one , to be content with consent issuing from a low or superficial region of the soul . Whether there is physical union or not , the exchange of love is unlawful if , on both sides , the consent does not come from that central point in the soul where the yes can be nothing less than eternal . The obligation of marriage which is so often regarded as a simple social convention today , is implanted in the nature of human thought through the affinity between carnal love and beauty . Everything which is related to beauty should be unaffected by the passage of time . Beauty is eternity here below . It is not surprising that in temptation men so often have the feeling of something absolute which infinitely surpasses them , which they can not resist . The absolute is indeed there . But we are mistaken when we think that it dwells in pleasure . The mistake is the effect of this imaginary transference which is the principal mechanism of human thought . Job speaks of the slave who in death will cease to hear the voice of his master and who thinks that this voice harms him . It is but too true . The voice does him only too much harm . Yet he is mistaken . The voice is not harmful in itself . If he were not a slave it would not hurt him at all . But because he is a slave , the pain and the brutality of the blows of the whip enter his soul by the sense of hearing at the same time as the voice , and penetrate to its very depths . There is no barrier by which he can protect himself . Affliction has forged this link . In the same way the man who thinks he is in the power of pleasure is really in the power of the absolute which he has transferred to it . This absolute is to pleasure what the blows of the whip are to the master ’ s voice ; but the association is not the result of affliction here , it is the result of an original crime , the crime of idolatry . Saint Paul has emphasised the kinship between vice and idolatry . He who has located the absolute in pleasure can not help being dominated by it . Man does not struggle against the absolute . He who knows how to locate the absolute outside pleasure possesses the perfection of temperance . The different kinds of vice , the use of drugs , in the literal or metaphorical sense of the word , all such things constitute the search for a state where the beauty of the world will be tangible . The mistake lies precisely in the search for a special state . False mysticism is another form of this error . If the error is thrust deeply enough into the soul , man can not but succumb to it . In general all the tastes of men from the guiltiest to the most innocent , from the most usual to the most peculiar , are related to a combination of circumstances , or to a set of people or surroundings which they imagine can give them access to the beauty of the world . The advantage of this or that group of circumstances is due to temperament , to the memories of a past life , to causes which are usually impossible to recognise . There is only one case , which moreover is frequent , when the attraction of the pleasure of the senses does not lie in the contact it offers with beauty ; it is when , on the contrary , it provides an escape from it . The soul seeks nothing so much as contact with the beauty of the world , or at a still higher level , with God ; but at the same time it flies from it . When the soul flies from anything it is always trying to get away , either from the horror of ugliness , or contact with what is truly pure . This is because all mediocrity flies from the light ; and in all souls , except those which are near perfection , there is a great part which is mediocre . This part is seized with panic every time that a little pure beauty or pure goodness appears ; it hides behind the flesh , it uses it as a veil . As a bellicose nation really needs to cover its aggression with some pretext or other if it is to succeed in its enterprises , the quality of the pretext being actually quite indifferent , so the mediocre part of the soul needs a slight pretext for flying from the light . The attraction of pleasure and the fear of pain supply this pretext . There again it is the absolute which dominates the soul , but as an object of repulsion and no longer as an attraction . Very often also in the search for carnal pleasure the two movements are combined ; the movement of running towards pure beauty and the movement of flying far from it are indistinguishably tangled . However it may be , in every kind of human occupation there is always some regard for the beauty of the world seen in more or less distorted or soiled images . As a consequence there is not any department of human life which is purely natural . The supernatural is secretly present throughout . Under a thousand different forms , grace and mortal sin are everywhere . Between God and these incomplete , unconscious , often criminal searchings for beauty , the only link is the beauty of the world . Christianity will not be incarnated so long as there is not joined to it the Stoic ’ s idea of filial piety for the city of the world , for the country of here below which is the universe . When , as the result of some misapprehension , very difficult to understand today , Christianity cut itself off from Stoicism , it condemned itself to an abstract and separate existence . Even the very highest achievements of the search for beauty , in art or science for instance , are not truly beautiful . The only true beauty , the only beauty which is the real presence of God , is the beauty of the universe . Nothing which is less than the universe is beautiful . The universe is beautiful as a beautiful work of art would be if there could be one which deserved this name . Thus it contains nothing which would constitute an end or a good . It has in it no finality beyond universal beauty itself . The essential truth to be known concerning this universe is that it is absolutely devoid of finality . Nothing in the way of finality can be ascribed to it except through a lie or a mistake . If we ask why such and such a word in a poem is in such and such a place and if there is an answer , either the poem is not of the highest order , or else the reader has understood nothing of it . If one can rightly say that the word is where it is in order to express a particular idea , or for the sake of a grammatical connection , or for the sake of the rhyme or alliteration , or to complete the line , or to give a certain colour , or even for a combination of several reasons of this kind , there has been a seeking for effect in the composition of the poem , there has not been true inspiration . In the case of a really beautiful poem the only answer is that the word is there because it is suitable that it should be . The proof of this suitability is that it is there and that the poem is beautiful . The poem is beautiful , that is to say the reader does not wish it other than it is . It is in this way that art imitates the beauty of the world . The suitability of things , beings and events consists only in this , that they exist and that we should not wish that they did not exist or that they had been different . Such a wish would be an impiety towards our universal country , a lack of the love of the Stoics . We are so constituted that this love is in fact possible ; and it is this possibility of which the name is the beauty of the world . The question of Beaumarchais : ‘ Why these things rather than others ? ’ never has any answer , because the world is devoid of finality . The absence of finality is the reign of necessity . Things have causes and not ends . Those who think to discern special designs of Providence are like professors who give themselves up to what they call the explanation of the text , at the expense of a beautiful poem . In art , the equivalent of this reign of necessity is the resistance of matter and arbitrary rules . Rhyme imposes upon the poet a direction in his choice of words which is absolutely unrelated to the sequence of ideas . Its function in poetry is perhaps analogous to that of affliction in our lives . Affliction forces us to feel with all our souls the absence of finality . If the soul is set in the direction of love , the more we con-template necessity , the more closely we press its metallic cold and hardness directly to our very flesh , the nearer we approach to the beauty of the world . That is what Job experienced . It was because he was so honest in his suffering , because he would not entertain any thought which might impair its truth , that God came down to reveal the beauty of the world to him . It is because absence of any finality or intention is the essence of the beauty of the world that Christ told us to behold the rain and the light of the sun , as they fall without discrimination upon the just and the unjust . This recalls the supreme cry of Prometheus : ‘ Heaven , whence the light common to all revolves for all. ’ Christ commands us to imitate this beauty . Plato also in the Timæus counsels us through contemplation to make ourselves like to the beauty of the world , like to the harmony of the circular movements which cause day and night , months , seasons and years to succeed each other and return . In these revolutions also , and in their combination , the absence of intention and finality is manifest ; pure beauty shines forth . It is because it can be loved by us , it is because it is beautiful , that the universe is a country . It is our only country here below . This thought is the essence of the wisdom of the Stoics . We have a heavenly country , but in a sense it is too difficult to love , because we do not know it ; above all , in a sense , it is too easy to love , because we can imagine it as we please . We run the risk of loving a fiction under this name . If the love of the fiction is strong enough it makes all virtue easy , but at the same time of little value . Let us love the country of here below . It is real ; it offers resistance to love . It is this country which God has given us to love . He has willed that it should be difficult yet possible to love it . We feel ourselves to be strangers , uprooted , in exile here below . We are like Ulysses who had been carried away during his sleep by sailors and woke in a strange land , longing for Ithaca with a longing that rent his soul . Suddenly Athena opened his eyes and he saw that he was in Ithaca . In the same way every man who longs indefatigably for his country , who is distracted from his desire neither by Calypso nor by the Sirens , will one day suddenly find that he is there . The imitation of the beauty of the world , that which corresponds to the absence of finality , intention and discrimination in it , is the absence of intention in ourselves , that is to say the renunciation of our own will . To be perfectly obedient is to be perfect as our Father in heaven is perfect . Among men , a slave does not become like his master by obeying him . On the contrary , the more he obeys the greater is the distance between them . It is otherwise between man and God . If a reasonable creature is absolutely obedient he becomes a perfect image of the Almighty as far as this is possible for him . We are made in the very image of God . It is by virtue of something in us which attaches to the fact of being a person but which is not the fact itself . It is the power of renouncing our own personality . It is obedience . Every time that a man rises to a degree of excellence which by participation makes of him a divine being , we are aware of something impersonal and anonymous about him . His voice is enveloped in silence . This is evident in all the great works of art or of thought , in the great deeds of saints and in their words . It is then true in a sense that we must conceive of God as impersonal , in the sense that he is the divine model of a person who passes beyond the self by renunciation . To conceive of him as an all-powerful person , or under the name of Christ as a human person , is to exclude oneself from the true love of God . That is why we have to adore the perfection of the heavenly Father in his even diffusion of the light of the sun . The divine and absolute model of that renunciation which is obedience in us—such is the creative and ruling principle of the universe—such is the fullness of being . It is because the renunciation of the personality makes man a reflection of God that it is so frightful to reduce men to the condition of inert matter by plunging them into affliction . When the quality of human personality is taken from them , the possibility of renouncing it is also taken away , except in the case of those who are sufficiently prepared . As God has created our independence so that we should have the possibility of renouncing it out of love , we should for the same reason wish to preserve the independence of our fellows . He who is perfectly obedient sets an infinite price upon the faculty of free choice in all men . In the same way there is no contradiction between the love of the beauty of the world and compassion . Such love does not prevent us from suffering on our own account when we are in affliction . Neither does it prevent us from suffering because others are afflicted . It is on another plane from suffering . The love of the beauty of the world , while it is universal , involves , as a love which is secondary and subordinate to itself , the love of all the truly precious things which bad fortune can destroy . The truly precious things are those which form ladders reaching towards the beauty of the world , openings on to it . He who has gone farther , to the very beauty of the world itself , does not love them any less but much more deeply than before . Numbered among them are the pure and authentic achievements of art and science . In a much more general way they include everything which envelops human life with poetry through all the social strata . Every human being has at his roots here below a certain terrestrial poetry , a reflection of the heavenly glory , the link , of which he is more or less vaguely conscious , with his universal country . Affliction is the tearing up of these roots . Human cities in particular , each one more or less according to its degree of perfection , surround the life of their inhabitants with poetry . They are images and reflections of the city of the world . Actually , the more they have the form of a nation , the more they claim to be countries themselves , the more distorted and soiled they are as images . But to destroy cities , either materially or morally , or to exclude human beings from a city , thrusting them down to the state of social outcasts , this is to sever every bond of poetry and love between human beings and the universe . It is to plunge them forcibly into the horror of ugliness . There can scarcely be a greater crime . We all have a share by our complicity in an almost innumerable quantity of such crimes . If only we could understand , it should wring tears of blood from us . THE LOVE OF RELIGIOUS PRACTICES The love of institutional religion , although the name of God necessarily comes into it , is not in itself an explicit , but an implicit love of God , for it does not involve direct , immediate contact with him . God is present in religious practices , when they are pure , just as he is present in our neighbour and in the beauty of the world ; in the same way and not any more . The form that the love of religion takes in the soul differs a great deal according to the circumstances of our lives . Some circumstances prevent the very birth of this love , others kill it before it has been able to grow very strong . In affliction some men , in spite of themselves , develop a hatred and contempt for religion because the cruelty , pride or corruption of certain of its ministers have made them suffer . There are others who have been reared from their earliest youth in surroundings impregnated with a spirit of this sort . We must conclude that in such cases , by God ’ s mercy , the love of our neighbour and the love of the beauty of the world , if they are sufficiently strong and pure , will be enough to raise the soul to any height . The love of institutional religion normally has as its object the prevailing religion of the country or circle in which a man is brought up . As the result of an inborn habit , everyone thinks first of that each time he thinks of a religious service . The whole virtue of religious practices can be conceived of from the Buddhist tradition concerning the recitation of the name of the Lord . It is said that Buddha made a vow to raise to himself , in the Land of Purity , all those who pronounced his name with the desire of being saved by him ; and that because of this vow the recitation of the name of the Lord really has the power of transforming the soul . Religion is nothing else but this promise of God . Every religious practice , every rite , all liturgy is a form of the recitation of the name of the Lord and in principle should have a real virtue , the virtue of saving whoever devotes himself to performing it with desire . All religions pronounce the name of God in their particular language . As a rule it is better for a man to name God in his native tongue rather than in one that is foreign to him . Except in special cases the soul is not able to abandon itself utterly when it has to make the slight effort of seeking for the words in a foreign language , even when this language is well known . A writer whose native language is poor , difficult to manipulate and not widely known throughout the world , is very strongly tempted to adopt another . There are a few like Conrad who have done so with startling success . But they are very rare . Except in special cases such a change does harm , both thought and style suffer , the writer is always ill at ease in the adopted language and can not rise above mediocrity . A change of religion is for the soul like a change of language for a writer . All religions , it is true , are not equally suitable for the recitation of the name of the Lord . Some , without any doubt , are very imperfect mediums . The religion of Israel , for instance must have been a singularly imperfect medium since it made the crucifixion of Christ possible . The Roman religion can scarcely be said to deserve the name of religion at all . But in general the relative value of the various religions is a very difficult thing to discern , it is almost impossible , perhaps quite impossible . For a religion is only known from inside . Catholics say this of Catholicism , but it is true of all religions . Religion is a form of nourishment . It is difficult to appreciate the flavour and food-value of something one has never eaten . The comparison of religions is only possible , in some measure , through the miraculous virtue of sympathy . We can know men to a certain extent if at the same time as we observe them from outside we manage by sympathy to transport our own soul into theirs for a time . In the same way the study of different religions does not lead to a real knowledge of them unless we transport ourselves for a time by faith to the very centre of whichever one we are studying . Here , moreover , this word faith is used in its strongest sense . This scarcely ever happens , for some have no faith , and the others have faith exclusively in one religion and only bestow upon the others the sort of attention we give to strangely shaped shells . There are others again who think they are capable of impartiality because they only have a vague religiosity which they can turn indifferently in any direction , whereas , on the contrary , we must have given all our attention , all our faith , all our love to a particular religion in order to think of any other religion with the high degree of attention , faith and love which is proper to it . In the same way , only those who are capable of friendship can take a real heart-felt interest in the fate of an utter stranger . In all departments of life , love is not real unless it is directed towards a particular object ; it becomes universal without ceasing to be real only as a result of analogy and transference . It might be said in passing that the knowledge of what analogy and transference are , a knowledge for which mathematics , the various branches of science , and philosophy , are a preparation , also has a direct relationship to love . In Europe today , and perhaps even in the whole world , the knowledge of comparative religion amounts to just about nothing . People have not even a notion of the possibility of such a knowledge . Even without the prejudices which get in our way , it is already very difficult for us even to form an idea of it . Among the different forms of religion there are , as it were , partial compensations for the visible differences , certain hidden equivalents which can only be caught sight of by the most penetrating discernment . Each religion is an original combination of explicit and implicit truths ; what is explicit in one is implicit in another . The implicit adherence to a truth can in some cases be worth as much as the explicit adherence , sometimes even a great deal more . He who knows the secrets of all hearts , alone knows the secret of the different forms of faith . He has never revealed this secret , whatever anyone may say . If one is born into a religion which is not too unsuitable for pronouncing the name of the Lord , if one loves this native religion with a well directed and pure love , it is difficult to imagine a legitimate motive for giving it up , before direct contact with God has placed the soul under the guidance of the divine will itself . After that the change is only legitimate if it is made in obedience . History shows that in fact this happens but rarely . Most often , perhaps always , the soul which has reached the highest realms of spirituality is confirmed in its love of the tradition which served it as a ladder . If the imperfection of the religion in which one is born is too great ; or if the form under which it appears in one ’ s native surroundings is too corrupt , or if , through special circumstances , love for this religion has never been born or has been killed , the adoption of a foreign religion is legitimate . It is legitimate and necessary for certain people ; probably not for everybody . This is the same with regard to those who have been brought up without the practice of any religion . In all other cases , to change one ’ s religion is a very serious decision , and it is much more serious to influence another person to change . It is yet more , infinitely more serious to exercise official pressure of such a nature in a conquered country . On the other hand , in spite of all the varieties of religion which exist in Europe and America , one might say that in principle , directly or indirectly , in a close or distant manner , it is the Catholic religion which forms the native spiritual background of all men belonging to the white races . The virtue of religious practices is due to a contact with what is perfectly pure , resulting in the destruction of evil . Nothing here below is perfectly pure except the total beauty of the universe , and that we are unable to feel directly until we are very far advanced in the way of perfection . Moreover , this total beauty can not be contained in anything tangible , though it is itself tangible in a certain sense . Religious things are special tangible things , existing here below and yet perfectly pure . This is not on account of their own particular character . The church may be ugly , the singing out of tune , the priest corrupt and the faithful inattentive . In a sense that is of no importance . It is as with a geometrician who draws a figure to illustrate a proof . If the lines are not straight and the circles are not round it is of no importance . Religious things are pure by right , theoretically , hypothetically , by convention . Therefore their purity is unconditioned . No stain can sully it . That is why it is perfect . It is not , however , perfect in the same way as Roland ’ s mare , which , while it had all possible virtues , had also the drawback of not existing . Human conventions are useless if they are not connected with motives which impel people to observe them . In themselves they are simple abstractions ; they are unreal and have no effect . But the convention by which religious things are pure is ratified by God himself . Thus it is an effective convention , a convention which contains virtue and operates of itself . This purity is unconditioned and perfect , and at the same time real . There we have a truth which is a fact and in consequence can not be demonstrated by argument . It can only be verified experimentally . It is a fact that the purity of religious things is almost everywhere to be seen in the form of beauty , when faith and love do not fail . Thus the words of the liturgy are marvellously beautiful ; and the words of the prayer which issued for us from the very lips of Christ is perfect above all . In the same way Romanesque architecture and Gregorian plain-chant are marvellously beautiful . At the very centre , however , there is something which is utterly stripped of beauty , where there is no outward evidence of purity , something which depends wholly on convention . It can not be otherwise . Architecture , singing , language , even if the words are chosen by Christ himself , all those things are in a sense distinct from absolute purity . Absolute purity , present here below to our earthly senses , as a particular thing , such can only be a convention , a convention which is nothing else . This convention , placed at the central point , is the Eucharist . The virtue of the dogma of the real presence lies in its very absurdity . Except for the infinitely touching symbolism of food , there is nothing in a morsel of bread which can be associated with our thought of God . Thus the conventional character of the divine presence is evident . Christ can only be present in such an object by convention . For this very reason he can be perfectly present in it . God can only be present in secret here below . His presence in the Eucharist is truly secret since no part of our thought can reach the secret . Thus it is total . No one dreams of being surprised that reasoning worked out from perfect lines and perfect circles which do not exist should be effectively applied to engineering . Yet that is incomprehensible . The reality of the divine presence in the Eucharist is more marvellous but not more incomprehensible . One might in a sense say by analogy that Christ is present in the consecrated host by hypothesis , in the same way that a geometrician says by hypothesis that there are two equal angles in a certain triangle . It is because it has to do with a convention that only the form of the consecration matters , not the spiritual state of him who consecrates . If it were something other than a convention , it would be at least partially human and not totally divine . A real convention is a supernatural harmony , taking the word harmony in the Pythagorean sense . Only a convention can be the perfection of purity here below , for all non-conventional purity is more or less imperfect . That a convention should be real , that is a miracle of divine mercy . The Buddhist conception of the recitation of the name of the Lord contains the same truth , for a name is a convention too . Yet our habit of thought which confuses things with their names makes us forget this very easily . The Eucharist is conventional to a higher degree . Even the presence of Christ in human flesh was something other than perfect purity , since he censured the man who called him good , and since he said : ‘ It is expedient for you that I go away. ’ 1 He must then be more completely present in a morsel of consecrated bread . His presence is more complete inasmuch as it is more secret . Yet this presence was probably still more complete , and also still more secret , in his body of flesh at the moment when the police seized this body as that of a common criminal . But as a result he was forsaken by all . He was too present . Men could not endure it . The convention of the Eucharist , or something of the kind , is indispensable for man ; the presence of perfect purity is indispensable for him . For man can only fix his full attention on something tangible , and he needs sometimes to fix his attention upon perfect purity . Only this act can make it possible for him , by a process of transference , to destroy a part of the evil that is in him . That is why the host is really the Lamb of God which takes away sin . We are all conscious of evil within ourselves , we all have a horror of it and want to get rid of it . Outside ourselves we see evil under two distinct forms , suffering and sin . But in our feelings about our own nature the distinction no longer appears , except abstractly or through reflection . We feel in ourselves something which is neither suffering nor sin , which is the two of them at once , the root common to both , defilement and pain at the same time . This is the presence of evil in us . It is the ugliness in us . The more we feel it , the more it fills us with horror . The soul rejects it in the same way as we vomit . By a process of transference we pass it on to the things which surround us . These things , however , thus becoming blemished and ugly in our eyes , send us back the evil that we had put into them . They send it back after adding to it . In this exchange the evil in us increases . It seems to us then that the very places where we are living and the things that surround us imprison us in evil , and that it becomes daily worse . This is a terrible anguish . When the soul , worn out with this anguish , ceases to feel it any more , there is little hope of its salvation . It is thus that an invalid conceives hatred and disgust for his room and surroundings , a prisoner for his cell , and only too often a worker for his factory . It is useless to provide people in this state with beautiful things , for there is nothing which does not eventually become spoilt and sullied by this process of transference , until it ends up as an object of horror . Perfect purity alone can not be defiled . If at the moment when the soul is invaded by evil the attention can be turned towards a thing of perfect purity , so that a part of the evil is transferred to it , this thing will be in no way tarnished by it , nor will it send it back . Thus each minute of such attention really destroys a part of the evil . What the Hebrews tried to accomplish , by means of a kind of magic , in their rite of the scapegoat , can only be carried out here on earth by perfect purity . The true scapegoat is the Lamb . The day when a perfect being was to be found here below in human form , the greatest possible amount of evil scattered around him was automatically concentrated upon him in the form of suffering . At that time , throughout the Roman Empire , the greatest misfortune and the greatest crime among men was slavery . That is why he suffered the death which was the extremity of affliction possible for a slave . In a mysterious manner this transference constitutes the Redemption . It is the same when a human being turns his eyes and his attention towards the Lamb of God present in the consecrated bread , a part of the evil which he bears within him is directed towards perfect purity , and there suffers destruction . It is a transmutation rather than a destruction . The contact with perfect purity dissociates the suffering and sin which had been mixed together so indissolubly . The part of evil in the soul is burnt by the fire of this contact and becomes only suffering , and the suffering is impregnated with love . In the same way when all the evil diffused throughout the Roman Empire was concentrated on Christ it became only suffering to him . If there were not perfect and infinite purity here below , if there were only finite purity , which contact with evil eventually exhausts , we could never be saved . Penal justice affords a frightful illustration of this truth . In principle it is something pure which has goodness for its object . It is , however , an imperfect , finite , human purity . Therefore , uninterrupted contact with a mixture of crime and affliction wears away this purity and puts in its place a defilement which is about equal to the totality of crime , a defilement which far exceeds that of any particular criminal . Men fail to drink from the source of purity . Creation would however be an act of cruelty if this spring did not well up wherever there is crime and affliction . If there had been no crime and affliction in the centuries further back than two thousand years , and in the countries untouched by missions , we might think that the Church had the monopoly of Christ and the sacraments . How can we bear the thought of a single crucified slave twenty-two centuries ago , how can we help accusing God , if we think that at that time Christ was absent and every kind of sacrament unknowm It is true that we hardly think at all about slaves crucified twenty-two centuries ago . When we have learnt to look at perfect purity , the shortness of human life is the only thing to prevent us from being sure that unless we play false we can attain perfection even here on earth . For we are finite beings and the evil which is within us is finite too . The purity which is offered to our eyes is infinite . However little evil we were to destroy at each look , we could be certain , if our time were unlimited that by looking often enough , one day we should destroy it all . We should then have reached the end of evil as the Bhagavat-Gita expresses so magnificently . We should have destroyed evil for the Lord of Truth and we should bring him truth , as the Egyptian Book of the Dead says . One of the principal truths of Christianity , a truth which goes almost unrecognised today , is that the looking is what saves us . The bronze serpent was lifted up so that those who lay maimed in the depths of degradation should be saved by looking upon it . It is at those moments when we are , as we say , in a bad mood , when we feel incapable of the elevation of soul which befits holy things , it is then that it is most effectual to turn our eye towards perfect purity . For it is then that evil , or rather mediocrity , comes to the surface of the soul and is in the best position for being burnt by contact with the fire . It is however then that the act of looking is almost impossible . All the mediocre part of the soul , fearing death with a more violent fear than that caused by the approach of the death of the body , revolts and suggests lies to protect itself . The effort not to listen to these lies , although we can not prevent ourselves from believing them , the effort to look upon purity at such times , has to be something very violent ; yet it is absolutely different from all that is generally known as effort , such as doing violence to one ’ s feelings or an act of will . Other words are needed to express it , but language can not provide them . The effort which brings a soul to salvation is like the effort of looking or of listening ; it is the kind of effort by which a fiancée accepts her lover . It is an act of attention and consent ; whereas what language designates as will is something suggestive of muscular effort . The will is on the level of the natural part of the soul . The right use of the will is a condition of salvation , necessary no doubt but remote , inferior , very subordinate and purely negative . The weeds are pulled up by the muscular effort of the peasant , but only sun and water can make the corn grow . The will can not produce any good in the soul . Efforts of the will are only in their right place for carrying out definite obligations . Wherever there is no strict obligation we must follow either our natural inclination or our vocation , that is to say God ’ s command . Actions prompted by our inclination clearly do not involve an effort of will . In our acts of obedience to God we are passive ; whatever difficulties we have to surmount , however great our activity may appear to be , there is nothing analogous to muscular effort ; there is only waiting , attention , silence , immobility , constant through suffering and joy . The crucifixion of Christ is the model of all acts of obedience . This kind of passive activity , the highest of all , is perfectly described in the Baghavat-Gita and in Lao-Tse . Also there is a supernatural union of opposites , a harmony in the Pythagorean sense . That we have to strive after goodness with an effort of our will is one of the lies invented by the mediocre part of ourselves in its fear of being destroyed . Such an effort does not threaten it in any way , it does not even disturb its comfort—not even when it entails a great deal of fatigue and suffering . For the mediocre part of ourselves is not afraid of fatigue and suffering , it is afraid of being killed . There are people who try to raise their souls like a man continually taking standing jumps in the hopes that , if he jumps higher every day , a time may come when he will no longer fall back but will go right up to the sky . Thus occupied he can not look at the sky . We can not take a single step towards heaven . It is not in our power to travel in a vertical direction . If however we look heavenwards for a long time , God comes and takes us up . He raises us easily . As Aeschylus says : ‘ There is no effort in what is divine. ’ There is an easiness in salvation which is more difficult for us than all our efforts . In one of Grimm ’ s stories there is a competition between a giant and a little tailor to see which is the stronger . The giant throws a stone so high that it takes a very long time before it comes down again . The little tailor lets a bird fly and it does not come down at all . Anything without wings always comes down again in the end . It is because the will has no power to bring about salvation that the idea of secular morality is an absurdity . What is called morality only depends on the will in what is , so to speak , its most muscular aspect . Religion on the contrary corresponds to desire , and it is desire which saves . The Roman caricature of Stoicism also appeals to the muscular will . But true Stoicism , the Stoicism of the Greeks , from which Saint John , or perhaps Christ , borrowed the terms of ‘ Logos ’ and ‘ pneuma , ’ is purely desire , piety and love . It is full of humility . The Christianity of today has let itself become contaminated by its adversaries , on this point as on many others . The metaphor of a search for God is suggestive of efforts of muscular will . It is true that Pascal contributed to the spread of this metaphor . He made several mistakes , notably that of confusing faith and auto-suggestion to a certain extent . In the great symbols of mythology and folk-lore , in the parables of the Gospel , it is God who seeks man . ‘ Quaerens me sedisti lassus. ’ Nowhere in the Gospel is there question of a search undertaken by man . Man does not take a step unless he receives some pressure or is definitely called . The rôle of the future wife is to wait . The slave waits and watches while his master is at a festival . The passer-by does not invite himself to the marriage feast , he does not ask for an invitation ; he is brought in almost by surprise ; his part is only to put on the garment which is appropriate . The man who has found a pearl in a field sells all his goods to buy the field ; he does not need to dig up the whole field with a spade in order to unearth the pearl , it is enough for him to sell all he possesses . To long for God and to renounce all the rest , that alone can save us . The attitude which brings about salvation is not like any form of activity . The Greek word which expresses it is hypomene , and patientia is rather an inadequate translation of it . It is the waiting or attentive and faithful immobility which lasts indefinitely and can not be shaken . The slave , who waits near the door so as to open immediately the master knocks , is the best image of it . He must be ready to die of hunger and exhaustion rather than change his attitude . It must be possible for his companions to call him , talk to him , hit him , without his even turning his head . Even if he is told that the master is dead , and even if he believes it , he will not move . If he is told that the master is angry with him and will beat him when he returns , and if he believes it , he will not move . Active searching is prejudicial , not only to love , but also to the intelligence , whose laws are the same as those of love . We just have to wait for the solution of a geometrical problem or the meaning of a Latin or Greek sentence to come into our mind . Still more must we wait for any new scientific truth or for a beautiful line of poetry . Seeking leads us astray . This is the case with every form of what is truly good . Man should do nothing but wait for the good and keep evil away . He should make no muscular effort except in order not to be shaken by evil . In the constant turning and returning of which our human condition is made up , true virtue in every domain is negative , at least in appearance . This waiting for goodness and truth is , however , something more intense than any searching . The notion of grace as opposed to virtue depending on the will and that of inspiration as opposed to intellectual or artistic work , these two notions , if they are well understood , show the efficacy of desire and of waiting . Attention animated by desire is the whole foundation of religious practices . That is why no system of morality can take their place . The mediocre part of the soul has however a great many lies in its arsenal which are capable of protecting it , even during prayer or the participation of the sacraments . It puts veils between our eyes and the presence of perfect purity , and it is clever enough to call them God . Such veils for instance as states of the soul , sources of sensible joy , of hope , of comfort , of soothing consolation or else a combination of habits , or one or several human beings , or perhaps a social circle . It is difficult to avoid the pitfall of striving to imagine the divine perfection which religion invites us to love . Never in any case can we imagine something more perfect than ourselves . This effort renders useless the marvel of the Eucharist . A certain formation of the intelligence is necessary in order to be able to contemplate in the Eucharist only what by definition it enshrines ; that is to say something which is totally outside our experience , something of which we only know , as Plato says , that it exists and that nothing else can ever be desired except in error . The trap of traps , the almost inevitable trap , is the social one . Everywhere , always , in everything , the social feeling produces a perfect imitation of faith , that is to say perfectly deceptive . This imitation has the great advantage of satisfying every part of the soul . That which longs for goodness believes it is fed . That which is mediocre is not hurt by the light ; it is quite at its ease . Thus everyone is in agreement . The soul is at peace . But Christ said that he did not come to bring peace . He brought a sword , the sword that severs in two , as Aeschylus says . It is almost impossible to distinguish faith from its social imitation . All the more so because the soul can contain one part of true faith and one of imitation faith . It is almost but not quite impossible . Under present circumstances , it is perhaps a question of life or death for faith that the social imitation should be repudiated . The necessity for a perfectly pure presence to take away defilement is not restricted to churches . People come with their stains to the churches , and that is all very well . It would , however , be more in conformity with the spirit of Christianity if , besides that , Christ went to bring his presence into those places most polluted with shame , misery , crime and affliction , into prisons and law-courts , into workhouses and shelters for the wretched and the outcast . Every session of bench or courts should begin and end with a prayer , in which the magistrates , the police , the accused and the public shared . Christ should not be absent from the places where work or study is going on . All human beings , whatever they are doing and wherever they are , should be able to have their eyes fixed , during the whole of each day , upon the serpent of bronze . It should also be publicly and officially recognised that religion is nothing else but a looking . In so far as it claims to be anything else , it is inevitable that it should either be shut up inside churches , or that it should stifle everything in every other place where it is found . Religion should not claim to occupy a place in society other than that which rightly belongs to supernatural love in the soul . Moreover it is true also that many people degrade charity in themselves because they want to make it occupy too large and too visible a place in their soul . Our Father only lives in secret . Love should always be accompanied by modesty . True faith implies great discretion , even with regard to itself . It is a secret between God and us in which we ourselves have scarcely any part . The love of our neighbour , the love of the beauty of the world and the love of religion are in a sense quite impersonal loves . This could easily not be so in the last case , because religion is connected with a certain section of society . The very nature of religious practices must remedy this . At the centre of the Catholic religion a little formless matter is found , a little piece of bread . The love directed towards this particle of matter is necessarily impersonal . It is not the human person of Christ such as we picture him , it is not the divine person of the Father , likewise subject to all the errors of our imagination , it is a fragment of matter which is at the centre of the Catholic religion . Herein lies the great scandal and yet the most wonderful virtue of this religion . In all authentic forms of religious life alike , there is something which guarantees their impersonal character . The love of God ought to be impersonal so long as there has not been any direct and personal contact ; otherwise it is an imaginary love . Afterwards it ought to be both personal and impersonal again , but this time in a higher sense . FRIENDSHIP There is however a personal and human love which is pure and which enshrines an intimation and a reflection of divine love . This is friendship , provided we keep strictly to the true meaning of the word . Preference for some human being is necessarily a different thing from charity . Charity does not discriminate . If it is found more abundantly in any special quarter , it is because affliction has chanced to provide an occasion there for the exchange of compassion and gratitude . It is equally available for the whole human race , inasmuch as affliction can come to all , offering them an opportunity for such an exchange . Preference for a human being can be of two kinds . Either we are seeking some particular good in him , or we need him . In a general way all possible attachments come under one of these heads . We are drawn towards a thing , either because there is some good we are seeking from it , or because we can not do without it . Sometimes the two motives coincide . Often however they do not . Each is distinct and quite independent . We eat distasteful food , if we have nothing else , because we can not do otherwise . A moderately greedy man looks out for delicacies , but he can easily do without them . If we have no air we are suffocated , we struggle to get it , not because we expect to get some advantage from it but because we need it . We go in search of sea air without being driven by any necessity , because we like it . In time it often comes about automatically that the second motive takes the place of the first . This is one of the great misfortunes of our race . A man smokes opium in order to attain to a special condition , which he thinks superior ; often , as time goes on , the opium reduces him to a miserable condition which he feels to be degrading ; but he is no longer able to do without it . Arnolphe bought Agnès1 from her adopted mother , because it seemed to him it would be an advantage to have a little girl with him , a little girl whom he would gradually make into a good wife . Later on she ceased to cause him anything but a heart-rending and degrading torment . But with the passage of time his attachment to her had become a vital bond which forced this terrible line from his lips : ‘ Mais je sens là-dedans qu ’ il faudra que je crève— ’ 2 Harpagon started by considering gold as an advantage . Later it became nothing but the object of a haunting obsession , yet an object of which the loss would cause his death . As Plato says , there is a great difference between the essence of the Necessary and that of the Good . There is no contradiction between seeking our own good in a human being and wishing for his good to be increased . For this very reason , when the motive which draws us towards anybody is simply some advantage for ourselves , the conditions of friendship are not fulfilled . Friendship is a super-natural harmony , a union of opposites . When a human being is in any degree necessary to us , we can not desire his good unless we cease to desire our own . Where there is necessity there is constraint and domination . We are in the power of that of which we stand in need , unless we possess it . The central good for every man is the free disposal of himself . Either we renounce it , which is a crime of idolatry , since it can only be renounced in favour of God , or we desire that the being we stand in need of should be deprived of it . Any kind of mechanism may join human beings together with bonds of affection which have the iron hardness of neces sity . Mother love is often of such a kind ; so at times is paternal love , as in Le Père Goriot of Balzac ; so is carnal love in its most intense form , as in L ’ Ecole des Femmes and in Phèdre ; so also , very frequently , is the love between husband and wife , chiefly as a result of habit . Filial and fraternal love are more rarely of this nature . There are moreover degrees of necessity . Everything is necessary in some degree if its loss really causes a decrease of vital energy . ( This word is here used in the strict and precise sense which it might have if the study of vital phenomena were as far advanced as that of falling bodies . ) When the degree of necessity is extreme , deprivation leads to death . This is the case when all the vital energy of one being is bound up with another by some attachment . In the lesser degrees , deprivation leads to a more or less considerable lessening of energy . Thus a total deprivation of food causes death , whereas a partial deprivation only diminishes the life force . Nevertheless the necessary quantity of food is considered to be that required if a person is not to be weakened . The most frequent cause of necessity in the bonds of affection is a combination of sympathy and habit . As in the case of avarice or drunkenness , that which was at first a search for some desired good is transformed into a need by the mere passage of time . The difference from avarice , drunkenness and all the vices , however , is that in the bonds of affection the two motives—search for a desired good , and need—can very easily co-exist . They can also be separated . When the attachment of one being to another is made up of need and nothing else it is a fearful thing . Few things in this world can reach such a degree of ugliness and horror . There is always something horrible whenever a human being seeks what is good and only finds necessity . The stories which tell of a beloved being who suddenly appears with a death ’ s head best symbolise this . The human soul possesses a whole arsenal of lies with which to put up a defence against this ugliness and , in imagination , to manufacture sham advantages where there is only necessity . It is for this very reason that ugliness is an evil , because it conduces to lying . Speaking quite generally , we might say that there is affliction whenever necessity , under no matter what form , is imposed so harshly that the hardness exceeds the capacity for lying of the person who receives the impact . That is why the purest souls are the most exposed to affliction . For him who is capable of preventing the automatic reaction of defence which tends to increase the soul ’ s capacity for lying , affliction is not an evil , although it is always a wounding and in a sense a degradation . When a human being is attached to another by a bond of affection which contains any degree of necessity , it is impossible that he should wish autonomy to be preserved both in himself and in the other . It is impossible by virtue of the mechanism of nature . It is however made possible by the miraculous intervention of the supernatural . This miracle is friendship . ‘ Friendship is an equality made of harmony , ’ said the Pythagoreans , There is harmony because there is a supernatural union between two opposites , that is to say necessity and liberty , the two opposites which God combined when he created the world and men . There is equality because each wishes to preserve the faculty of free consent both in himself and in the other . When anyone wishes to put himself under a human being or consents to be subordinated to him , there is no trace of friendship . Racine ’ s Pylades is not the friend of Orestes . There is no friendship where there is inequality . A certain reciprocity is essential in friendship . If all goodwill is entirely lacking on one of the two sides , the other should suppress his own affection , out of respect for the free consent which he should not desire to force . If on one of the two sides there is not any respect for the autonomy of the other , this other must cut the bond uniting them out of respect for himself . In the same way , he who consents to be enslaved can not gain friendship . But the necessity contained in the bond of affection can exist on one side only , and in this case there is only friendship on one side , if we keep to the strict and exact meaning of the word . A friendship is tarnished as soon as necessity triumphs , if only for a moment , over the desire to preserve the faculty of free consent on both sides . In all human things , necessity is the principle of impurity . All friendship is impure if even a trace of the wish to please , or the contrary desire to dominate is found in it . In a perfect friendship these two desires are completely absent . The two friends have fully consented to be two and not one , they respect the distance which the fact of being two distinct creatures places between them . Man has the right to desire direct union with God alone . Friendship is a miracle by which a person consents to view from a certain distance , and without coming any nearer , the very being who is necessary to him as food . It requires the strength of soul that Eve did not have ; and yet she had no need of the fruit . If she had been hungry at the moment when she looked at the fruit , and if in spite of that she had remained looking at it indefinitely without taking one step towards it , she would have performed a miracle analagous to that of perfect friendship . Through this supernatural miracle of respect for human autonomy , friendship is very like the pure forms of compassion and gratitude called forth by affliction . In both cases the contraries which are the terms of the harmony are necessity and liberty , or in other words subordination and equality . These two pairs of opposites are equivalent . From the fact that the desire to please and the desire to command are not found in pure friendship , it has in it , at the same time as affection , something not unlike a complete indifference . Although it is a bond between two people it is in a sense impersonal . It leaves impartiality intact . It in no way prevents us from imitating the perfection of our Father in heaven who freely distributes sunlight and rain in every place . On the contrary , friendship and this distribution are the mutual conditions one of the other , in most cases at any rate . For , as practically every human being is joined to others by bonds of affection which have in them some degree of necessity , he can not go towards perfection except by transforming this affection into friendship . Friendship has something universal about it . It consists of loving a human being as we should like to be able to love each soul in particular of all those who go to make up the human race . As a geometrician looks at a particular figure in order to deduce the universal properties of the triangle , so he who knows how to love directs upon a particular human being a love which is universal . The consent to preserve an autonomy within ourselves and in others is essentially of a universal order . As soon as we wish for this autonomy to be respected in more than just one single being we desire it for everyone , for we cease to arrange the order of the world in a circle whose centre is here below . We transport the centre of the circle beyond the heavens . Friendship does not have this power if the two beings who love each other , through an unlawful use of affection , think they only form one . But then there is not friendship in the true sense of the word . That is what might be called an adulterous union , even though it comes about between husband and wife . There is not friendship where distance is not kept and respected . The simple fact of having pleasure in thinking in the same way as the beloved being , or in any case the fact of desiring such an agreement of opinion , attacks the purity of the friendship at the same time as its intellectual integrity . It is very frequent . But at the same time pure friendship is rare . When the bonds of affection and necessity between human beings are not supernaturally transformed into friendship , not only is the affection of an impure and low order , but it is also combined with hatred and repulsion . That is shown very well in L ’ Ecole des Femmes and in Phèdre . The mechanism is the same in affections other than carnal love . It is easy to under-stand this . We hate what we are dependent upon . We become disgusted with what depends on us . Sometimes affection does not only become mixed with hatred and revulsion , it is entirely changed into it . The transformation may sometimes even be almost immediate , so that hardly any affection has had time to show ; this is the case when necessity is laid bare almost at once . When the necessity which brings people together has nothing to do with the emotions , when it is simply due to circumstances , hostility often makes its appearance from the start . When Christ said to his disciples : ‘ Love one another , ’ it was not attachment he was laying down as their rule . As it was a fact that there were bonds between them due to the thoughts , the life and the habits they shared , he commanded them to transform these bonds into friendship , so that they should not be allowed to turn into impure attachment or hatred . Since , shortly before his death , Christ gave this as a new commandment to be added to the two great commandments of the love of our neighbour and the love of God , we can think that friendship which is pure , like the love of our neighbour , has in it something of a sacrament . Christ perhaps wished to suggest this with reference to Christian friendship when he said : ‘ Where there are two or three gathered together in my name there am I in the midst of them. ’ Pure friendship is an image of that original and perfect friendship which belongs to the Trinity and which is the very essence of God . It is impossible for two human beings to be one while scrupulously respecting the distance which separates them , unless God is present in each of them . The point at which parallels meet is infinity . IMPLICIT AND EXPLICIT LOVE Even the most narrow-minded of Catholics would not dare to affirm that compassion , gratitude , love of the beauty of the world , love of religious practices and friendship belonged exclusively to those centuries and countries which recognised the Church . These forms of love are rarely found in their purity , but it would even be difficult to say that they were met with more frequently in those centuries and countries than in the others . To think that love in any of these forms can exist anywhere where Christ is absent is to belittle him so grieviously that it amounts to an outrage . It is impious and almost sacriligious . These kinds of love are supernatural , and in a sense they are absurd . They are the height of folly . So long as the soul has not had direct contact with the very person of God , they can not be supported by any knowledge based either on experience or reason . They can not therefore rest upon any certainty , unless the word is used in a metaphorical sense to indicate the opposite of hesitation . In consequence it is better that they should not be associated with any belief . This is more honest intellectually , and it safeguards our love ’ s purity more effectively . On this account it is more fitting . In what concerns divine things , belief is not fitting . Only certainty will do . Anything less than certainty is unworthy of God . During the period of preparation , these indirect loves constitute an upward movement of the soul , a turning of the eyes , not without some effort , towards higher things . After God has come in person , not only to visit the soul as he does for a long time beforehand , but to possess it and to transport its centre near to his very heart , it is otherwise . The chicken has cracked its shell , it is outside the egg of the world . These first loves continue , they are more intense than before , but they are different . He who has passed through this adventure has a deeper love than ever for those who suffer affliction and for those who help him in his own , for his friends , for religious practices and for the beauty of the world . But his love in all these forms has become a movement of God himself , a ray merged in the light of God . That at least is what we may suppose . These indirect loves are only the attitude towards beings and things here below of the soul turned towards the Good . They themselves have not any particular good as an object . There is no final good here below . Thus strictly speaking we are no longer concerned with forms of love , but with attitudes inspired by love . In the period of preparation the soul loves in emptiness . It does not know whether anything real answers its love . It may believe that it knows , but to believe is not to know . Such a belief does not help . The soul only knows for certain that it is hungry . The important thing is that it announces its hunger by crying . A child does not stop crying if we suggest to it that perhaps there is no bread . It goes on crying just the same . The danger is not lest the soul should doubt whether there is any bread , but lest , by a lie , it should persuade itself that it is not hungry . It can only persuade itself of this by lying , for the reality of its hunger is not a belief , it is a certainty . We all know that there is no true good here below , that everything which appears to be good in this world is finite , limited , wears out and , once worn out , leaves necessity exposed in all its nakedness . Every human being has probably had some lucid moments in his life when he has definitely acknowledged to himself that there is no final good here below . But as soon as we have seen this truth we cover it up with lies . Many people even take pleasure in proclaiming it , seeking a morbid joy in their sadness , without ever having been able to bear facing it for a second . Men feel that there is a mortal danger in facing this truth squarely for any length of time . That is true . Such knowledge strikes more surely than a sword ; it inflicts a death which is more frightening than that of the body . After a time it kills everything within us which constitutes our ego . In order to bear it we have to love truth more than life itself . Those who do this turn away from the fleeting things of time with all their souls , to use the expression of Plato . They do not turn towards God . How could they do so when they are in total darkness ? God himself sets their faces in the right direction . He does not , however , show himself to them for a long time . It is for them to remain motionless , without averting their eyes , listening ceaselessly , and waiting , they know not for what ; deaf to entreaties and threats , unmoved by every shock , unshaken in the midst of every upheaval . If after a long period of waiting God allows them to have an indistinct intuition of his light or even reveals himself in person , it is only for an instant . Once more they have to remain still , attentive , inactive , calling out only when their desire can not be contained . It does not rest with the soul to believe in the reality of God if God does not reveal this reality . In trying to do so it eithers labels something else with the name of God , and that is idolatry , or else its belief in God remains abstract and verbal . This is the belief which prevails wherever religious dogma is taken for granted , as is the case with those centuries and countries in which it never enters anyone ’ s head to question it . The state of nonbelief is then what Saint John of the Cross calls a night . The belief is verbal and does not penetrate the soul . At a time like the present , incredulity may be equivalent to the dark night of Saint John of the Cross if the unbeliever loves God , if he is like the child who does not know whether there is bread anywhere , but who cries out because he is hungry . When we are eating bread , and even when we have eaten it , we know that it is real . We can nevertheless raise doubts about the reality of the bread . Philosophers raise doubts about the reality of the world of the senses . Such doubts are however purely verbal , they leave the certainty intact and actually serve only to make it more obvious to a wellbalanced mind . In the same way he to whom God has revealed his reality can raise doubts about this reality without any harm . They are purely verbal doubts , a form of exercise to keep his intelligence in good health . What amounts to criminal treason , even before such a revelation and much more afterwards , is to question the fact that God is the only thing worthy of love . That is a turning away of our eyes , for love is the soul ’ s looking . It means that we have stopped for an instant to wait and to listen . Electra did not seek Orestes , she waited for him . When she was convinced that he no longer existed , and that nowhere in the whole world was there anything which could be Orestes , she did not on that account return to her former associates . She drew back from them with greater aversion than ever . She preferred the absence of Orestes to the presence of anyone else . Orestes was to have delivered her from slavery , from rags , servile work , dirt , hunger , blows and innumerable humiliations . She no longer hoped for that . But never for an instant did she dream of employing another method which could obtain a luxurious and honoured life for her ; the method of reconciliation with those in power . She did not want wealth and consideration unless they came through Orestes . She did not even give a thought to such things . All she wanted was to exist no longer , since Orestes had ceased to exist . At that moment Orestes could hold out no longer . He could not help declaring himself . He gave certain proof that he was Orestes . Electra saw him , she heard him , she touched him . There would be no more question for her now as to whether her saviour was in existence . He who has had the same adventure as Electra , he whose soul has seen , heard and touched for itself , he will recognise God as the reality inspiring all indirect loves , the reality of which they are as it were the reflections . God is pure beauty . This is incomprehensible , for beauty , by its very essence , has to do with the senses . To speak of an imperceptible beauty must seem a misuse of language to anyone who has any sense of exactitude : and with reason . Beauty is always a miracle . But the miracle is raised to the second degree when the soul receives an impression of beauty which , while it is beyond all sense perception is no abstraction , but real and direct as the impression caused by a song at the moment it reaches our ears . Everything happens as though , by a miraculous favour , our very senses themselves had been made aware that silence is not the absence of sounds , but something infinitely more real than sounds , and the centre of a harmony more perfect than anything which a combination of sounds can produce . Furthermore there are degrees of silence . There is a silence in the beauty of the universe which is like a noise when compared with the silence of God . God is , moreover , our real neighbour . The term of person can only be rightly applied to God , and this is also true of the term impersonal . God is he who bends over us , afflicted as we are , and reduced to the state of being nothing but a fragment of inert and bleeding flesh . Yet at the same time he is in some sort the victim of misfortune as well , the victim who appears to us as an inanimate body , incapable of thought , this nameless victim of whom nothing is known . The inanimate body is this created universe . The love we owe to God , this love which would be our crowning perfection if we were able to attain to it , is the divine model both of gratitude and compassion . God is also the perfect friend . So that there should be between him and us , bridging the infinite distance , something in the way of equality , he has chosen to place an absolute quality in his creatures , the absolute liberty of consent , which leaves us free to follow or swerve from the God-ward direction he has communicated to our souls . He has also extended our possibilities of error and falsehood so as to leave us the faculty of exercising a spurious rule in imagination , not only over the universe and the human race , but also over God himself , in so far as we do not know how to use his name aright . He has given us this faculty of infinite illusion so that we should have the power to renounce it out of love . In fact , contact with God is the true sacrament . We can , however , be almost certain that those whose love of God has caused the disappearance of the pure loves belonging to our life here below are no true friends of God . Our neighbour , our friends , religious ceremonies , and the beauty of the world do not fall to the level of unrealities after the soul has had direct contact with God . On the contrary , it is only then that these things become real . Previously they were half dreams . Previously there was no reality . 1 Hebrews xi , 1 . 1Jeunesse Ouvrière Chrétienne , c.f . note on Jécistes . 1 Luke xi , 52 . 1 John xvi , 7 . 1 Characters in Molière ’ s L ’ Ecole des Femmes . Harpagon , below , is a character in Molière ’ s L ’ Avare . 2 But I feel in all this that I shall be torn asunder . CONCERNING THE ‘ OUR FATHER ’ CONCERNING THE ‘ OUR FATHER ’ This paper which was written in Ardèche , or immediately after Simone ’ s stay at Gustave Thibon ’ s house , corresponds with the discovery of the ‘ Our Father ’ which she had just made in the course of the summer , as related in Letter IV . ‘ Our Father who art in Heaven. ’ He is our Father . There is nothing real in us which does not come from him . We belong to him . He loves us , since he loves himself and we are his . Nevertheless he is our Father who is in heaven—not elsewhere . If we think to have a Father here below it is not he , it is a false God . We can not take a single step towards him . We do not walk vertically . We can only turn our eyes towards him . We do not have to search for him , we only have to change the direction in which we are looking . It is for him to search for us . We must be happy in the knowledge that he is infinitely beyond our reach . Thus we can be certain that the evil in us , even if it overwhelms our whole being , in no way sullies the divine purity , bliss and perfection . ‘ Hallowed be thy Name ’ God alone has the power to name himself . His name is un-pronounceable for human lips . His name is his word . It is the Word of God . The name of any being is an intermediary between the human spirit and that being , it is the only means by which the human spirit can conceive something about a being that is absent . God is absent . He is in heaven . Man ’ s only possibility of gaining access to him is through . his name . It is the Mediator . Man has access to this name , although it also is transcendent . It shines in the beauty and order of the world and it shines in the interior light of the human soul . This name is holiness itself ; there is no holiness outside it ; it does not therefore have to be hallowed . In asking for its hallowing we are asking for something which exists eternally , with full and complete reality , so that we can neither increase nor diminish it , even by an infinitesimal fraction . To ask for that which exists , that which exists really , infallibly , eternally , quite independently of our prayer , that is the perfect petition . We can not prevent ourselves from desiring ; we are made of desire ; but the desire which nails us down to what is imaginary , temporal , selfish , can , if we make it pass wholly into this petition , become a lever which will tear us from the imaginary into the real and from time into eternity , and will lift us right out of the prison of self . ‘ Thy Kingdom Come. ’ This concerns something to be achieved , something not yet here . The Kingdom of God means the complete filling of the entire soul of intelligent creatures with the Holy Spirit . The Spirit bloweth where he listeth ? We can only invite him . We must not even try to invite him in a definite and special way to visit us or anyone else in particular , or even everybody in general ; we must just invite him purely and simply , so that our thought of him is an invitation , a longing cry . It is as when one is in extreme thirst , ill with thirst ; then one no longer thinks of the act of drinking in relation to oneself , nor even of the act of drinking in a general way . One merely thinks of water , actual water itself , but the image of water is like a cry from our whole being . ‘ Thy will be done ! We are only absolutely , infallibly certain of the will of God concerning the past . Everything which has happened , whatever it may be , is in accordance with the will of the almighty Father . That is implied by the notion of almighty power . The future also , whatever it may contain , once it has come about , will have come about in conformity with the will of God . We can neither add to nor take from this conformity . In this clause , therefore , after an upsurging of our desire towards the possible , we are once again asking for that which is . Here , however , we are not concerned with an eternal reality such as the holiness of the Word , but with what happens in the time order . Nevertheless we are asking for the infallible and eternal conformity of everything in time with the will of God . After having , in our first petition , torn our desire away from time in order to fix it upon eternity , thereby transforming it , we return to this desire which has itself become in some measure eternal , in order to apply it once more to time . Whereupon our desire pierces through time to find eternity behind it . That is what comes about when we know how to make every accomplished fact , whatever it may be , an object of desire . We have here quite a different thing from resignation . Even the word acceptance is too weak . We have to desire that everything which has happened should have happened , and nothing else . We have to do so , not because what has happened is good in our eyes , but because God has permitted it , and because the obedience of the course of events to God is in itself an absolute good . ‘ On earth as it is in heaven. ’ The association of our desire with the almighty will of God should be extended to spiritual things . Our own spiritual ascents and falls , and those of the beings we love , have to do with the other world , but they are also events which take place here below , in time . On that account they are details in the immense sea of events and are tossed about with the ocean in a way which conforms to the will of God . Since our failures of the past have come about , we have to desire that they should have come about . We have to extend this desire into the future , for the day when it will have become the past . It is a necessary correction of the petition that the kingdom of God should come . We have to cast aside all other desires for the sake of our desire for eternal life , but we should desire eternal life itself with renunciation . We must not even become attached to detachment . Attachment to salvation is even more dangerous than the others . We have to think of eternal life as one thinks of water when dying of thirst , and yet at the same time we have to desire that we and our loved ones should be eternally deprived of this water rather than receive it in abundance in spite of God ’ s will , if such a thing were conceivable . The three foregoing petitions are related to the three Persons of the Trinity , the Son , the Spirit , and the Father , and also to the three divisions of time , the present , the future and the past . The three petitions which follow have a more direct bearing on the three divisions of time , and take them in a different order ; present , past and future . ‘ Give us this day our daily bread , ’ [ the bread which is supernatural . ] Christ is our bread . We can only ask to have him now . Actually he is always there at the door of our souls , wanting to enter in , though he does not force our consent . If we agree to his entry , he enters ; directly we cease to want him , he is gone . We can not bind our will today for tomorrow , we can not make a pact with him that tomorrow he will be within us , even in spite of ourselves . Our consent to his presence is the same as his presence . Consent is an act , it can only be actual , that is to say in the present . We have not been given a will which can be applied to the future . Everything which is not effective in our will is imaginary . The effective part of the will has its effect at once , its effectiveness can not be separated from itself . The effective part of the will is not effort , which is directed towards the future . It is consent , it is the ‘ yes ’ of marriage . A ‘ yes ’ pronounced within the present moment and for the present moment , but spoken as an eternal word , for it is consent to the union of Christ with the eternal part of our soul . Bread is a necessity for us . We are beings who continually draw our energy from outside , for as we receive it we use it up in effort . If our energy is not daily renewed , we become feeble and incapable of movement . Besides actual food , in the literal sense of the word , all incentives are sources of energy for us . Money , ambition , consideration , decorations , celebrity , power , our loved ones , everything which puts into us the capacity for action is like bread . If anyone of these attachments penetrates deeply enough into us to reach the vital roots of our carnal existence , its loss may break us and even cause our death . That is called dying of love . It is like dying of hunger . All these objects of attachment go together with food , in the ordinary sense of the word , to make up the daily bread of this world . It depends entirely on circumstances whether we have it or not . We should ask nothing with regard to circumstances unless it be that they may conform to the will of God . We should not ask for earthly bread . There is a transcendant energy whose source is in heaven , and this flows into us as soon as we wish for it . It is a real energy ; it performs actions through the agency of our souls and of our bodies . We should ask for this food . At the moment of asking , and by the very fact that we ask for it , we know that God will give it to us . We ought not to be able to bear to go without it for a single day , for when our actions only depend on earthly energies , subject to the necessity of this world , we are incapable of thinking and doing anything but evil . God saw ‘ that the misdeeds of man were multiplied on the earth and that all the thoughts of his heart were continually bent upon evil. ’ 1 The necessity which drives us towards evil governs everything in us except the energy from on high at the moment when it comes into us . We can not store it . ‘ And forgive us our debts , as we also forgive our debtors. ’ At the moment of saying these words we must have already remitted everything that is owing to us . This not only includes reparation for any wrongs we think we have suffered , but also gratitude for the good we think we have done , and it applies in a quite general way to all we expect from people and things , to all we consider as our due and without which we should feel ourselves to have been frustrated . All these are the rights which we think the past has given us over the future . First there is the right to a certain permanence . When we have enjoyed something for a long time , we think that it is ours , and that we are entitled to expect fate to let us go on enjoying it . Then there is the right to a compensation for every effort whatever its nature , be it work , suffering or desire . Every time that we put forth some effort and the equivalent of this effort does not come back to us in the form of some visible fruit , we have a sense of false balance and emptiness which makes us think that we have been cheated . The effort of suffering from some offence causes us to expect the punishment or apologies of the offender , the effort of doing good makes us expect the gratitude of the person we have helped , but these are only particular cases of a universal law of the soul . Every time we give anything out we have an absolute need that at least the equivalent should come into us , and because we need this we think we have a right to it . Our debtors comprise all beings and all things ; they are the entire universe . We think we have claims everywhere . In every claim which we think we possess there is always the idea of an imaginary claim of the past on the future . That is the claim which we have to renounce . To have forgiven our debtors is to have renounced the whole of the past in a lump . It is to accept that the future should still be virgin and intact , strictly united to the past by bonds which are unknown to us , but quite free from the bonds which our imagination thought to impose upon it . It means that we accept the possibility that no matter what may happen , and that it may happen to us in particular ; it means that we are prepared for the future to render all our past life sterile and vain . In renouncing at one stroke all the fruits of the past without exception , we can ask of God that our past sins may not bear their miserable fruits of evil and error . So long as we cling to the past , God himself can not stop this horrible fruiting . We can not hold on to the past without retaining our crimes , for we are unaware of what is most essentially bad in us . The principal claim which we think we have on the universe is that our personality should continue . This claim implies all the others . The instinct of self-preservation makes us feel this continuation to be a necessity , and we believe that a necessity is a right . We are like the beggar who said to Talleyrand : ‘ Sir , I must live , ’ and to whom Talleyrand replied . ‘ I do not see the necessity for that. ’ Our personality is entirely dependent on external circumstances which have unlimited power to crush it . But we would rather die than admit this . From our point of view the equilibrium of the world is a combination of circumstances so ordered that our personality remains intact and seems to belong to us . All the circumstances of the past which have wounded our personality appear to us to be disturbances of balance which should infallibly be made up for one day or another by phenomena having a contrary effect . We live on the expectation of these compensations . The near approach of death is horrible chiefly because it forces the knowledge upon us that these compensations will never come . To remit debts is to renounce our own personality . It means that we renounce everything which goes to make up our ego , without any exception . It means knowing that in the ego there is nothing whatever , no psychological element , which external circumstances could not do away with . It means accepting that truth . It means being happy that things should be so . The words ‘ Thy will be done ’ imply this acceptance , if we say them with all our soul . That is why we can say a few moments later : ‘ We forgive our debtors. ’ The forgiveness of debts is spiritual poverty , spiritual nakedness , death . If we accept death completely , we can ask God to make us live again , purified from the evil which is in us . For to ask him to forgive us our debts is to ask him to wipe out the evil which is in us . Pardon is purification . God himself has not the power to forgive the evil in us while it remains there . God will have forgiven our debts when he has brought us to the state of perfection . Until then God forgives our debts partially in the same measure as we forgive our debtors . ‘ And lead us not into temptation , but deliver us from evil. ’ The only temptation for man is to be abandoned to his own resources in the presence of evil . His nothingness is then proved experimentally . Although the soul has received supernatural bread at the moment when it asked for it , its joy is mixed with fear because it could only ask for it for the present . The future is still to be feared . The soul has not the right to ask for bread for the morrow , but it expresses its fear in the form of a supplication . It finishes with that . The prayer began with the word ‘ Father , ’ it ends with the word ‘ evil. ’ We must go from confidence to fear . Confidence alone can give us strength enough not to fall as a result of fear . After having contemplated the name , the kingdom and the will of God , after having received the supernatural bread and having been purified from evil , the soul is ready for that true humility which crowns all virtues . Humility consists of knowing that in this world the whole soul , not only what we term the ego in its totality , but also the supernatural part of the soul which is God present in it , is subject to time and to the vicissitudes of change . There must be absolute acceptance of the possibility that everything which is natural in us should be destroyed . But we must simultaneously accept and repudiate the possibility that the super-natural part of the soul should disappear . It must be accepted as an event which would only come about in conformity with the will of God . It must be repudiated as being something utterly horrible . We must be afraid of it , but our fear must be as it were the completion of confidence . The six petitions correspond with each other in pairs . The bread which is transcendant is the same thing as the divine name . It is what brings about the contact of man with God . The kingdom of God is the same thing as his protection stretched over us against temptation ; to protect is the function of royalty . Forgiving our debtors their debts is the same thing as the total acceptance of the will of God . The difference is that in the first three petitions the attention is fixed solely on God . In the three last , we turn our attention back to ourselves in order to compel ourselves to make these petitions a real and not an imaginary act . In the first half of the prayer , we begin with acceptance . Then we allow ourselves a desire . Then we correct it by coming back to acceptance . In the second half , the order is changed ; we finish by expressing desire . Only desire has now become negative ; it is expressed as a fear ; therefore it corresponds to the highest degree of humility and that is a fitting way to end . The Our Father contains all possible petitions ; we can not conceive of any prayer which is not already contained in it . It is to prayer what Christ is to humanity . It is impossible to say it once through , giving the fullest possible attention to each word , without a change , infinitesimal perhaps but real , taking place in the soul . 1 Genesis vi , 5 . THE THREE SONS OF NOAH AND THE HISTORY OF MEDITERRANEAN CIVILIZATION THE THREE SONS OF NOAH AND THE HISTORY OF MEDITERRANEAN CIVILISATION Apart from any historical considerations , this essay , expressing synthetic and even syncretic views concerning the ancient religions which either foreshadowed Christianity or could be associated with it , corresponds with studies in which Simone Weil was absorbed at the very time she left Marseilles and to which she attached great importance . The tradition concerning Noah and his sons throws a startling light on the history of Mediterranean civilisation . It is necessary to delete what the Hebrews added to the story out of hatred . Their interpretation does not agree with the tradition itself . This is quite obvious , since they impute a fault to Ham and make a curse fall upon one of his sons named Canaan . The Hebrews boasted of having utterly exterminated a number of cities and tribes in the land of Canaan when Joshua was leading them . Give a dog a bad name and you can hang him . After he has been hanged you can accuse him more than ever . We do not listen to a murderer ’ s evidence against his victim . Japheth is the ancestor of the nomadic peoples to whom we trace the origin of the Indo-Europeans . Shem is the ancestor of the Semitic races , the Hebrews , the Arabs , the Assyrians and others ; nowadays the Phoenicians are placed with them for linguistic reasons which are not conclusive ; some people , having no scruples with regard to the dead ( who must put up with anything ) , and shaping the past to suit their present purposes , even link the Phoenicians with the Jews . The Bible , on the other hand , makes no allusions to any affinity between these two nations . We see from Genesis that the Phoenicians were descended from Ham . So were the Philistines who are today considered to be Cretans and therefore akin to the Pelasgians ; so , before the Semitic invasion , were the Mesopotamian peoples , now apparently thought to be the Sumerians , whose civilisation was to be handed on to the Babylonians at a later date ; so were the Hittites ; and finally so were the Egyptians . Every civilisation bordering the Mediterranean immediately before the time of recorded history can be traced back to Ham . This list includes all the civilising peoples . The Bible says : ‘ God , seeing that the misdeeds of man were multiplied on earth , and that the thoughts of his heart were continually bent upon evil…was grieved inwardly with sorrow. ’ But there was Noah . ‘ Noah was a just man and perfect in his generation , and he walked with God. ’ 1 Before him , since the beginning of humanity , none had been found just except Abel and Enoch . Noah saved the human race from destruction . A Greek tradition attributed this benefaction to Prometheus . Deucalion , the Noah of Greek mythology , was the son of Prometheus . The same Greek word is used for the ark of Deucalion and , in Plutarch , for the chest in which the body of Osiris was shut . The Christian liturgy compares the ark of Noah with the Cross . Noah apparently was the first , like Dionysus , to plant a vineyard . ‘ And he drank of the wine , and was drunk ; and he was uncovered in his tent. ’ 2 Wine is also found together with bread in the hands of Melchisedec , King of Justice and Peace and priest of the most High God , to whom Abraham did homage , paying tribute and receiving a blessing : Melchisedec , concerning whom one of the Psalms says : ‘ The Lord said to my Lord : sit thou at my right hand… Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec ’ ; 3 and whom Saint Paul writes of as ‘ King of peace ’ who , ‘ without father , without mother , without genealogy , having neither beginning of days nor end of life , but made like unto the Son of God , abideth a priest continually. ’ 1 On the other hand wine was forbidden to the priests of Israel in the service of God . Christ , however , from the beginning to the end of his public life , drank wine with his friends . He compared himself to the stem of the vine , the symbolical dwelling-place of Dionysus for the Greeks . His first act was the changing of water into wine ; his last , the changing of wine into the blood of God . Noah , drunk with wine , was naked in his tent . Naked like Adam and Eve were before the fall . The sin of disobedience made them ashamed of their bodies , but it made them still more ashamed of their souls . All of us who share in their sin share also in their shame , and take great care always to keep our souls covered with a garment of carnal and social thoughts ; if we were to draw it aside for an instant we should die of shame . Yet we shall have to lose it one day if Plato is to be believed , for he says that all are judged and that the judges , dead and naked themselves , view with their actual souls , the actual souls which are dead and naked before them . Only a few perfect beings are dead and naked here below , during their earthly life . Saint Francis was one of these . His thoughts were always fixed on the nakedness and poverty of the crucified Christ . Saint John of the Cross was another , for he desired nothing in the world except nakedness of spirit . But if they could bear to be stripped naked , it was because they were drunk with wine ; they were drunk with the wine which flows daily on the altar . This wine is the only remedy for the shame which possessed Adam and Eve . ‘ When Ham saw that the nakedness of his father was uncovered , he told his two brethren without. ’ But they did not wish to see it . They took a cloak and going up to him backwards covered their father ; turning away their faces . Egypt and Phoenicia are Ham ’ s daughters . Herodotus , confirmed by many traditions and evidences , traced the origin of religion to Egypt and considered the Phoenicians to be responsible for spreading it . All the religious thought of the Hellenes came to them from the Pelasgians who had received it almost entirely from Egypt through the Phoenicians . A magnificent passage in Ezechiel further confirms Herodotus , for there Tyre is likened to the Cherub who guards the tree of life in Eden , and Egypt to the tree of life itself—that tree of life to which Christ compared the kingdom of heaven and which had for fruit his very body hanging on the Cross . ‘ Take up a lamentation upon the King of Tyre . Say to him : … Thou wast the sum of perfection… Thou hast been in Eden the garden of God…thou art the anointed cherub of protection…thou hast walked in the midst of the stones of fire…thou wast perfect in thy ways from the day that thou wast created till iniquity was found in thee. ’ 1 ‘ Speak to Pharaoh… Whom art thou like in thy greatness ? He was a cedar with fair branches… His top pierced the clouds… The waters nourished him . All the birds of the air made their nests in his boughs , and all the beasts of the field brought forth their young under his branches . Beneath his shadow dwelt all the great nations . He was most beautiful in his greatness , because of the length of his roots , for his root bathed in great waters… No tree in the garden of God equalled him for beauty… All the trees of Eden that were in the paradise of God envied him… I have rejected him… . Strangers and the most cruel of the nations have cut him down . They have left him lying there… Upon his ruins all the birds of the air make their dwelling… I have caused mourning to be made ; because of him I have covered the deep waters… I have darkened Lebanon for him. ’ If only the great nations were still under the shadow of that tree ! Never since the time of the Egyptians have the super-natural justice and mercy towards men been described with such poignant tenderness . An inscription four thousand years old put the following words into the mouth of God : ‘ I have created the four winds , so that every man may breathe as freely as his brother ; the great waters so that there may be abundance for poor and rich alike . I have created all men in the same image . And I have forbidden that they should commit iniquity , but their hearts have undone what my word decreed. ’ Death made of every man , whether rich or needy , a God for eternity and justified him as an Osiris , if he could say to Osiris : ‘ Lord of truth , I bring thee truth . I have destroyed evil for thy sake. ’ In order to do this he had to be able to say : ‘ I have never put my name forward for honours . I have not exacted that anyone should work extra time on my account . I have not had any slave punished by his master . I have never caused anyone to die . I have not left anyone to suffer hunger . I have not made anyone afraid . I have not spoken haughtily . I have not turned a deaf ear to words of justice and truth. ’ Supernatural compassion for men can only be a participation in the compassion of God , that is to say the Passion . Herodotus saw the hallowed spot where each year , beside a round stone basin filled with water , they celebrated the festival , or mystery as they called it , which represented the Passion of God in symbolic form . The Egyptians knew that it is only given to man to see God in the sacrificial Lamb . About twenty thousand years ago , if Herodotus is to be believed , Heracles , who was a man , but holy and possibly divine , and who may perhaps be the same as Nimrod , the grandson of Ham , wanted to see God face to face and made supplication to him . God did not wish for this , but , unable to refuse the prayer , he slew and skinned a ram . He took its head for a mask , clothed himself in its fleece and so showed himself . In memory of this , once every year at Thebes they slew a ram and put its skin over the statue of Zeus while the people mourned . Then the ram was buried in a consecrated sepulchre . The knowledge and love of a second divine person , distinct from the powerful creator God , and yet identical with him ; of a divine person who was both wisdom and love , who ordered the universe , who taught and guided mankind , who , by his incarnation , united human nature to that of God , and was a Mediator , suffering and redeeming men ’ s souls ; that was what the nations had found beneath the branches of the marvellous tree of Ham ’ s daughter-nation . If that constituted the wine with which Noah was intoxicated when Ham saw him drunk and naked , he might well have lost the shame which is the heritage of the sons of Adam . The Hellenes , whose forefather Japheth had refused to look upon the nakedness of Noah , reached the holy land of Greece in a state of ignorance . That is evident from the writings of Herodotus and the testimony of many another . Nevertheless the first of them to arrive , that is to say the Athenians , eagerly drank of the teaching which was offered them . With them , the God who is other than the supreme Deity and at the same time identical with him , is disguised under a great many names . These would not conceal him from our eyes if they were not blinded by prejudice , for a quantity of associations , allusions , hints , often very clear ones , show that all these names are equivalent to each other and to that of Osiris . Here are some of them : Dionysus , Prometheus , Love , Celestial Aphrodite , Pluto , Cora , Persephone , Minos , Hermes , Apollo , Artemis , the Soul of the World . Another name which was marvellously favoured was Logos , meaning Word or rather Relationship and Mediation . The Greeks also had knowledge of a third person , connecting the two others and completing the Trinity . This knowledge must likewise have come to them from Egypt , since that was their only source . Everywhere in Plato we find references to this , and the idea is already known to Heraclitus , The hymn to Zeus of the Stoic Cleanthes , inspired by Heraclitus , brings the Trinity before our eyes : ‘ Such is the power of the servant that thou holdest in thy invincible hands . ‘ That which is double-edged , that which is made of fire , that which is eternally alive , the lightning… . ‘ By that thou sendest forth the Logos , straight and unswervingly , throughout all things… . ‘ Him , begotten so great , supreme king in the universe…. ’ The Greeks also knew , under several names , all equivalent to Isis , a feminine being , maternal , a virgin , ever spotless , not identical with God and yet divine , Mother of men and things , Mother of the Mediator . Plato speaks of her clearly , but in a voice hushed as though with tenderness and awe , in the Timoeus . Other peoples descended from Japheth and Shem were enlightened by the children of Ham , and though they received the teaching late they did so with avidity . This was the case with the Celts . They had certainly accepted the doctrines of the Druids before their arrival in Gaul , for this arrival was tardy and a Greek tradition includes the Druids of Gaul among the sources of Greek philosophy . Druidism must , therefore , have been the religion of the Iberians . The little we know of its doctrines shows them to be akin to those of Pythagoras . The Babylonians absorbed the civilisation of Mesopotamia . The Assyrians , who were a barbaric race , probably remained more or less indifferent to it . The Romans were utterly deaf and blind to all spiritual things until the day when they were more or less humanised by Christian baptism . It seems that the Germanic peoples likewise only gained a notion of the super-natural when they became Christian . But we must surely except the Goths , that nation of righteous men , probably Thracian quite as much as they were German , and related to the Getae , those nomads utterly enamoured of immortality and the other world . Israel rejected the supernatural revelation , for they did not want a God who spoke to the soul in secret , but a God who made his presence known to the nation as a whole and protected them in battle . They wanted power and prosperity . In spite of their frequent and prolonged contact with Egypt , the Hebrews remained impervious to faith either in Osiris , in immortality , in salvation , or in the identification of the soul with God through charity . This refusal made possible the putting to death of Christ . After his death they still persisted in it throughout the dispersion and sufferings without end . Yet from time to time Israel received gleams of light which made it possible for Christianity to take its rise in Jerusalem . Job was a Mesopotamian , not a Jew , but his marvellous words figure in the Bible and evoke the Mediator in that supreme function of arbitrator between God himself and man which Hesiod attributes to Prometheus . Daniel , the first in date among the Hebrews whose story is not sullied by some heinous feature , was initiated in the wisdom of the Chaldeans during his exile and was a friend of the kings of the Medes and Persians . According to Herodotus , the Persians kept all human imagery out of their idea of the divinity , but under the name of Mithra they adored the celestial Aphrodite side by side with Zeus . It is probably she who appears in the Bible under the name of Wisdom . Also during the exile the idea of the righteous sufferer crept into Jewish thought , coming either from Greece , Egypt or elsewhere . Later on , a wave of Hellenism swept over Palestine for a space . Thanks to all these influences , Christ was able to have some disciples . But how much time , patience and care he had to devote to their training ! Whereas the eunuch of the Queen of Ethiopia , coming from the country which appears in the Iliad as the chosen land of the Gods , the country where , according to Herodotus , adoration was offered to Zeus and Dionysus alone , and where , as Herodotus further tells us , Greek mythology placed the safe and hidden refuge of the child Dionysus—that eunuch did not need any preparation . As soon as he had heard the account of the life and death of Christ he was baptised . The Roman Empire was really idolatrous then . The idol was the State . People adored the Emperor . As all other forms of religious life had to be subordinated to that one , none could rise above idolatry . The Romans massacred absolutely all the Druids of Gaul . They slew and imprisoned the worshippers of Dionysus , accusing them of debauchery , which was a poor enough reason , if we take into account the extent to which debauchery was publicly tolerated . They persecuted the Pythagoreans , the Stoics , the philosophers . All that remained was really debased idolatry , and thus the prejudices of Israel which had been passed on to the first Christians were verified by a coincidence . The Greek mysteries had long ago become degraded , those imported from the east carried about as much weight as the beliefs of the Theosophists today . Thus the wrong idea of paganism was able to gain credence . Hebrew prejudices , which infiltrated into the very substance of Christianity , have uprooted Europe , cutting it off from its millennial past , and they have established an impossible water-tight bulkhead between religious and secular life , the latter being wholly inherited from what are known as pagan times . Europe , thus uprooted , has since gone on to uproot itself still more completely , by departing in great measure from the Christian tradition itself , without being able to renew any spiritual link with antiquity . A little later it went into all the other continents of this earthly globe , uprooting them in their turn , by force of arms , by money , by technics and by religious propaganda . We might perhaps now say that the whole world is uprooted and widowed of its past , and that this is so because the new-born Christianity did not know how to detach itself from a tradition which , after all , had ended up with the murder of Christ . And yet it was not upon idolatry that Christ poured the fire of his indignation , it was upon the Pharisees , the skilled specialists and craftsmen of the Jewish restoration , both religious and national , and the enemies of the Hellenic tradition . ‘ You have taken away the key of knowledge. ’ 1 Has the full range of that accusation ever been realised ? Christianity which came to birth in Judea at the time of the Roman domination , has in it the spirit of all three sons of Noah at once . Hence there have been wars between Christians where one side was moved by the spirit of Ham and the other by that of Japheth . The war of the Albigenses is an example of this . It is not for nothing that Romanesque sculptures in the Egyptian style are found at Toulouse . But , if the spirit of the sons who refused their share of inebriation and nakedness is to be found among Christians , how much more among those who reject Christianity and openly take up once more the cloak of Shem and Japheth ! All those who truly share in the wine of Noah and Melchisedek and in the blood of Christ , whether they do so in a greater or lesser degree , directly or indirectly , consciously or implicitly , they are all brothers of Egypt and Tyre , adopted sons of Ham . Today , however , the sons of Japheth and of Shem make the most noise . The former are powerful and the latter persecuted . Though separated by a terrible hatred they are brothers , and there is a great resemblance between them . They are alike in their refusal of nakedness , in their need for clothing made of flesh and warm with the collective warmth of numbers , clothing to protect the evil which each one bears within him from the light . Such clothing renders God harmless , it makes it equally possible to deny or acknowledge him , to call upon him under true or false names ; it makes it possible to pronounce his name without the soul being transformed by its supernatural power . Can this story of the three brothers , of whom the youngest , as in every tale , was granted a marvellous adventure , also have a bearing on lands far beyonds the shores of the Mediterranean ? It is difficult to guess . We can but think that the Hindu tradition , which in the very heart of its inspiration is so suggestive of Greek thought , is probably not of Indo-European origin ; otherwise the Hellenes would have already possessed it when they arrived in Greece and would not have had to learn it all over again . On the other hand , according to Nonnus , there are two references to India in the Dionysian tradition ; Zagreus was brought up near an Indian river called Hydaspes , and Dionysus went on an expedition to India . It may be noticed in passing that in the course of this journey he met an impious king who attacked him with his army south of Mount Carmel , when he was unarmed , and that he was forced to take refuge in the Red Sea . The Iliad mentions this incident too , but without placing it . Could it be a reference to Israel ? However that may be , the relationship between Dionysus and Vishnu is obvious , and Dionysus is also called Bacchus . We can not say more with regard to India . Probably nothing more can be said with regard to the rest of Asia , Oceania , America , or the black races of Africa . The legend of the three brothers provides the key to the history of the Mediterranean basin , however . Ham came under a curse , truly enough , but he did so in common with all those things and beings which are destined to suffer affliction on account of an excess of beauty or purity . In the course of ages a great many invasions have succeeded each other . The invaders have always been descendants of the sons who chose to be blind . Each time that the invader has given himself up to the spirit of the place which is the spirit of Ham , and has drunk of its inspiration , there has been a civilisation . Each time that he has preferred to maintain his proud ignorance , there has been barbarism , and darkness worse than death has covered the land for centuries . May the spirit of Ham soon blossom once again beside the waves of this sea . ADDENDUM There is another proof that Noah received a revelation . The Bible says that God made a pact with humanity in the person of Noah and that the rainbow is the sign of it . A pact between God and man can only be a revelation . This revelation is related to the notion of sacrifice . It was as God smelt the odour of Noah ’ s sacrifice that he resolved that he would never again think of destroying the human race . This sacrifice was redemptive . One might almost consider it as a foreshadowing of the sacrifice of Christ . Christians think of the Mass as a sacrifice in which the Passion is repeated day by day . The Baghavat-Gita , which is prior to the Christian era , also makes the incarnate God say : ‘ Sacrifice is myself , present in this body. ’ So the association of the ideas of sacrifice and incarnation probably dates from very ancient times . The Trojan war was one of the most tragic examples of the two brothers ’ hatred for Ham . It was a criminal attack made by Japheth upon Ham . Only people descended from Ham were found on the side of Troy ; none were on the other side . There is one apparent exception which is a confirmation . It is that of the Cretans . Crete was one of the pearls of the civilisation issuing from Ham . In the Iliad we see the Cretans on the side of the Achaeans . But Herodotus tells us that they were false Cretans . They were Hellenes who a short time before had peopled the island which had become almost deserted . Nevertheless , on their return , Minos , angry with . them because of their participation in the war , struck them down with plague . In the Vth century the Pythea of Delphi forbad the Cretans to join with the Greeks in the Median wars . The Trojan War was really an attempt to destroy a whole civilisation . The attempt succeeded . Homer always calls Troy ‘ Holy Ilion. ’ This was the original sin of the Greeks , andfilled them with remorse . By their remorse , they , the executioners , were found worthy to inherit something of the inspiration of their victims . It is however true also that , with the exception of the Dorians , the Greeks were a mixture of Hellenes and Pelasgians , a mixture in which the Hellenes were the element of invasion , but the Pelasgians predominated . The Pelasgians were descended from Ham . The Hellenes learnt everything from them . The Athenians in particular were almost purely Pelasgian . If of the two hypotheses between which scholars are divided , we accept the one according to which the Hebrews came out of Egypt in the XIIIth century , the time of their exodus is near that of the Trojan War , as indicated by Herodotus . This suggests a simple enough theory . It is that at the very time when Moses judged , whether by divine inspiration or not , that the Hebrews had wandered long enough in the desert and could enter Palestine , that country was emptied of its warriors by the Trojan War , the men of Troy having called even fairly distant peoples to their assistance . The country , left undefended , fell an easy prey to the Hebrews who , under Joshua , needed few miracles to enable them to massacre the population without difficulty . But one day the warriors returned from Troy . Then the conquests were halted . At the beginning of the Book of Judges we even find the Hebrews much less advanced than at the end of the Book of Joshua ; moreover we see them battling with populations which they were said to have utterly exterminated under Joshua . We can thus understand how the Trojan War left no trace in the Bible , and how the conquest of Palestine by the Hebrews left none in the traditions of the Greeks . Nevertheless the silence of Herodotus concerning Israel is very puzzling . It must be because this nation was regarded at the time as something sacriligious which it was not even permitted to mention . That would be conceivable if it was the Israelites who were referred to under the name of Lycurgus , the king who took up arms against the unarmed Dionysus . There was assuredly a change , however , after their return from exile and the reconstruction of the temple . 1 Genesis vi , 5–9 . 2 Genesis ix , 21 . 3 Psalm cx , 1–4 . 1 Hebrews vii , 2–3 . 1 Ezechiel xxviii , 12–15 . 1 Luke xi , 52 . 
Simone Weil is one of the most important thinkers of the modern period. The distinctive feature of her work is the indissoluble link she makes between the theory and p ractice of both pol itics and religion and her translation of thought into action . A brilliant philosopher and mathematician, her life rep­ resents a quest for justice and balance in both the academic and the p ractical spheres. A scholar of deep and wide eru dition, she became during the thirties an inspired teacher and activist. So as to experience physical labour at first hand, she spent almost two years as a car factory worker soon after the Front Populaire and later became a fighter in the Spanish Civil War. When her home city of Paris was occupied, she joined the Resistance in the South of France and became for a time an agricultural labourer before acceding to her parents' wish to escape Nazi persecution of the Jews by fleeing to New York. Leaving America, she joined the Free French in London where, frustrated by the exclusively intellectual nature of the work delegated to h e r, and weakened by a number of physical and emotional factors, she contracted tuberculosis and died in a Kentish sanatorium at the age of thirty-four. The bulk of her voluminous oeuvre was published posthumously. SIAN MILES was born and brought up in the bi-cultu ral atmos­ phere of Wales and educated there and in France where she has lived for many years. She has taught at a number of universities worldwide, including Tufts University, Massachusetts, Dakar Unive rsity, Senegal and York University, Toronto. She now teaches at \Varwick University in England . Her other p ublica­ Geo rge Sand: JV/arianne; a translation of V iolet Echo; in collaboration, Paul Valery's CalziersfNote­ books; and Guy de Maupassant: A Parisia n Affair a nd O ther Stories (Penguin Classics). tions include: Trefusis' SIMONE WElL An Anthology Edited and Introduced by SIAN MILES PENGUIN BOOKS PENGUIN BOOKS Published by the Penguin Group Penguin Books Ltd, 80 Strand, London WC2R ORL, England Penguin Group (USA) Inc., 375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014, USA Penguin Group (Canada), 90 Eglinton Avenue East, Suire 700, Toronto, Ontario. Canada M4P 2Y3 (a division of Pearson Penguin Canada Inc.) Penguin Ireland, 25 St Stephen's Green, Dublin 2, Ireland (a division of Penguin Books Ltd) Penguin Group (Australia), 250 Camberwell Road, Cambcrwell, Victoria 3124, Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) Penguin Dooks India Pvt Ltd, 11 Community Centre, Panchsheel Park, New Delhi- 110 017, India Penguin Group (NZ), cnr Airborne and Rosedale Roads, Albany, Auckland 1310, New Zealand (a division of Pearson New Zealand Ltd) Penguin Books (South Africa) (Pty) Ltd, 24 Sturdee A venue, Rosebank 2196, South Africa Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices: 80 Strand, London WC2R ORL, England www.penguin.com First published by Virago Press 1986 Published in Penguin Classics 2005 1 Copyright©Introductions and arrangements Sian Miles, 1986, 2005 All rights reserved The moral right of the author has been asserted Simone Wcil's writings are copyrighted as follows: Atte11te de Die11 0 La Colombe Edition du Vieux Colombier 1950; Waiting ou God© G. P. Putnam's Sons and Routledge & Kegan Paul 1951. renewed 1979. Cahiers de Simone Wei/ Vol I.() Librairie Pion 1951, Vol. II() Pion 1953, \"ol Ill ©Pion 1956; The Noteboohs of Simo11e Wei/ 0 G. P. Putnam's Sons 1956. La Pesa1tte11r et Ia Grtice"' Librairie Pion 1947; Grat1ily aud Grace Q G. P. Putnam's Sons and Routledge & Kegan Paul 1952, renewed 1980. L'E11ra<i11eme11t 0 Editions Gallimard 1949; The Need for Roots ©Simone Wei) 1952, preface by T. S. Eliot 0 G. P. Putnam's Sons and Routledge & Kegan Paul 1952, renewed 1980. Oppressioll et Liberte C Gallimard 1955; Oppressio11 a11d Liberty© Routledge and Kegan Paul 1958. Leroru de Philosophie©Librairie Pion 1959; Lectures 011 Philosophy ttl Cambridge University Press 1978. Conditiou premiere d'rm trat,ail uou-senrile from La Co11ditiou Ouvriere ©Editions Gallimard 1951; Prerequisite to Di"g11ity of Labour© SHin Miles 1986. L 'lliade 011 le poeme de Ia force from La Source Grecque C Editions Gallimard 1953; The Iliad or tire Poem of Force() Mary McCanhy 1945. Ser.'etlt)' Letters Q Oxford Uni\'ersity Press 1965. La Vie de Sinrmre Wei/ e Librairie Anheme Fayard 1973; Simoue Wei/: A Lrfe 0 Pantheon Dooks 1976. Ecn'ts de Umdres et Denri�res Lettres 0 Gallimard 1957 and Ecrits lristoriques et politiques©Gallimard 1960. Selected Essays 193�--JJ 0 Oxford University Press 1962. Printed in England by Clays Ltd, St Ives pic Except in the United States of America, this book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired out, or otherwise circulated without the publisher's prior consent in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published and without a similar condition including this condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser CO N T E N TS Foreword to the Penguin edition Preface to the Virago edition Acknowledgements I ntroduction Human Personality The Self The N eeds of the Soul The Great Beast Analysis of Oppression The Mysticism of Work The Iliad or the Poem of Force Void and Compensation D raft for a Statement of Human Obligations Attention and Will The Power of Words Contradiction Prerequisite to Dignity of Labour Detachment Friendship Love Chance B ibliography I ndex Vll XV XVll 1 69 99 1 05 141 1 47 178 1 82 216 22 1 23 1 238 259 264 277 281 290 297 299 303 FOR E WOR D to the Penguin Edition In the decade and a half since the first publication of this anthology, the influence of Simone Weil's life and work has spread and deepened in many different spheres. Some of these include the familiar fields of philosophy and religion with which her name has traditionally been most closely associated. Some, however, represent other areas where the seeds of her understanding have taken strong root and produced the kind of interdisciplinary cross-fertilization characteristic in aspiration of both her formal and informal writings. These include the political, the educational, the psychological as well as the cultural, in which strands of her thinking have developed in ways marking it as having been unusually prescient, innovative for its time and spectacularly applicable to our own. In the fields of politics and economics her many per­ suasive arguments on the inherent tendency of power to over-extend itself have an all too resonant ring. 'If we want to consider power as a conceivable phenomenon, we must think it can extend the foundations on which it rests up to a certain point only, after which it comes up, as it were, against an impassable wall. But even so it is not in a position Vlll SIMONE WElL- AN ANTHOLOGY to stop; the spur of competition forces it to go ever farther, that is to say, to go beyond the limits within which it can be effectively exercised.' ( Weil, 1958) Some might argue that the imperative which drives the US and her allies to attempt to control ever greater proportions of the world's dwindling oil resources does indeed lead them into ever wider confrontations, creating opposition which they can neither understand nor overcome. Claiming that wherever small is possible, big is bad, she anticipates by several decades the notion, though not the sadly revelatory name of subsidiarity now enshrined in the European Community Treaty, and Schumacher's 'small is beautiful' ethos which emerged in parts of the West after her death and is ever more widely accepted as a means of controlling irresponsible expansion. Small-scale production, localized economies and greater emphasis on regionaliza­ tion are expressed as objectives and consummations devoutly to be wished in the many essays on the nature of work and on industrial relations written after her own experiences as a factory hand and agricultural labourer in the late thirties and soon after the occupation of France by the Nazis. Some readers have been tempted to muse on the contem­ porary relevance of her proposition that the complexity of relations between developed states and a perceived need for co-ordination lead to increased hegemony and consequent domination. Advanced nations ( including especially the UK since the demise of virtually all its manufacturing sector), exercise control and exploitation over the world economy through the manipulation of information in ways she anticipates with chilling accuracy. The intense discussion which took place a few years ago about the poten­ tially revolutionary influence of the internet because of its decentralized structure and the at least theoretical possi­ bility that information would be available to all equally has proved something of a chimera due to the fact that information remains heavily controlled. Others have noted her influence in the area of resistance FOREWORD IX to war and argue that the industry of war in consumer soci­ eties is supported by two factors: the objectives of statecraft and the desires of consumers. Thus pacifist platforms, even if supported by millions of people, are likely to fail primarily because the roots of consumption and the inability to give up socialized ways of thinking about needs are obstacles to anti-war movements. Statecraft implicates, at the occupa­ tional level, workers who might be opposed to imperialism or war, but as soldiers or technicians or specialized skill workers, like miners or drillers, they have a job to perform and keep. This locates both the routes of recruitment to war and the movements to protest along specific class channels. Simone Weil's ideas on bureaucracy and work are particu­ larly useful in helping to understand the limits of freedom as well as the necessity of enracinement or rootedness for survival. Even more importantly, perhaps, something of the un­ reality of fictive nature of the language of war is strongly foreshadowed by her argument that winning itself is an illu­ sion which discounts the sufferings and impermanence of victory. Underlying much feminist thought and expression is the implicit understanding that the language of war is deliberately obfuscatory, not to say absurd. Since Simone Weil's time, one of the most important movements to have arisen is of course feminism itself, and it is interesting to compare and contrast the influence of her work in its devel­ opment. Unsurprisingly, it is among feminist theologians as well as philosophers that it appears to figure most promi­ nently. Some of the latter are deeply disturbed, not to say repelled, particularly by the later mysticism in her work, seeing in it an unhealthy or even morbid fascination with pain and suffering as well as passive acceptance of a tradi­ tionally masculinist and necrophilic language of discourse. Others, however, see in her thought elements with which more recent developments in both philosophy and theology may be strongly linked. Her dazzling insights, often expressed with both terseness and conviction, include the claims that all error, suffering and unhappiness stem from X SIMONE WElL- AN ANTHOLOGY forgetting one is God. Though Simone Weil makes no special claims for women (quite the contrary, in fact) debate has arisen among contemporary feminist thinkers, particu­ larly in France, beginning with the work of lrigaray, to centre on the idea of 'becoming divine' as opposed merely to probing and testing the validity of essentially patristic doctrines and terminology. Here again, at the interface of religion and philosophy, language is of crucial and exciting importance. Simone Weil's conception of ' creative attention' is grasped as an individual's just and loving gaze directed upon an individ­ ual reality and the potential of the former to transform both the one who attends and the other who is attended to. This understanding has modified, amongst other orthodoxies, the view of prayer as petition or intercession. Rowan Williams, writing exactly fifty years after her death, in an article examining the strength and ambiguity of her work claims: ' Weil's analysis of how God is to be spoken of remains one of the most difficult and challenging of this century and for that reason it is important not to canonize it or domesticate it.' (Williams, 1995). He goes on to suggest that it collapses under the weight of what he terms 'con­ tradictory pressures'. Simone Weil, as a mathematician and particularly as a geometer, positively invites discussion of such phrases and embraces with a boldness both untypical of her times and an enthusiasm connected with her love of Eastern religion the whole notion of seizing contradiction as a means to understanding. If her thought continues to influence philosophers and theologians, who struggle with the task of tracing a lin­ guistic dividing line between their two fields, it provides illumination for those whose interests combine the philo­ sophic with the cultural and in the first instance, the literary. Iris Murdoch, writing of her first encounter with the work of Weil, recalls with great and affecting simplicity just being moved by such deep, radiant thinking. As George Steiner has remarked on Murdoch in his Introduction to her Existentialists and Mystics: FOREWORD XI Properly grasped, the 'mystical' pursuit of the Good, of perfect unison with moral truths arises out of a rootedness in common humanity, in 'ordinary' being, far more concrete than either the ' language-games' of analytic-academic philosophers or the ideologies of the existentialists. For I ris Murdoch, there is in 'mysticism', when it its attached to life, a deep-lying utilitarian­ ism. In all this, the absolutely key persona is that of Simone Wei!. Iris Murdoch herself has much to say about the process towards a state of mind and body closely akin to Weil's attention. Quoting the poet Valery and his assertion that 'the proper, unique and perpetual object of thought is that which does not exist', she describes the state aspired to as 'an orientation of the soul towards something which one does not know but whose reality one does.' ( Murdoch, 1992.) Her admiration for Weil's work is both deep and enduringly evident throughout both her philosophical and novelistic oeuvre and to read her, Murdoch asserts, is to be reminded of a standard. George Steiner's phrase 'deep-lying utilitarianism' suggests the theme of another twentieth-century writer similarly influenced by the work of Simone Wei!. Seamus Heaney, in the first of his lectures as Professor of Poetry at Oxford, acknowledges the temptation to show how poetry's existence as a form of art relates to our existence as citizens of society - how it is 'of present use'. His lecture, entitled 'The Redress of Poetry' quotes a familiar argument of Weil's, most lucidly expressed in Gravity and Grace where she writes: If we know in what way society is unbalanced , we must do what we can to add weight to the lighter scale . . . we must have formed a conception of equilibrium and be ever read to change sides like justice, ' that fugitive from the camp of the conquerors . . . Obedience to the force of gravity . The greatest sin . ' (Wei!, 1952a) . Heaney notes that this work is informed by: . . . the idea of counterweighting, of balancing out the forces, of XII SIMONE WElL- AN ANTHOLOGY redress - tilting the scales of reality towards some transcendent equilibrium. And in the activity of poetry too, there is a tendency to place a counter-reality in the scales - a reality which may be only imagined but which nevertheless has weight because it is imagined within the gravitational pull of the actual and can therefore hold its own and balance out against the historical situation. This redressing effect of poetry comes from its being a glimpsed alternative, a revelation of potential that is denied or constantly threatened by circumstances. (Heaney, 1995 .) Interestingly and appropriately enough, he illustrates his remarks with 'The Pulley' and 'Love', the latter of George Herbert's poems being particularly influential in turn on Simone Weil herself. Heaney is not the only poet of our times to have gained major insights from the work of Simone Weil. Adrienne Rich, his American near-contemporary is another, who, in her Lies, Secrets and Silence evokes a familiar image from Weil's work; that of some hapless inarticulate in the dock, listening mutely while the judge and learned counsel keep up a flow of witticisms: Those who suffer from injustice most are the least able to articulate their suffering . . . the silent majority, if released into language, would not be content with the perpetuation of the conditions which have betrayed them. But this notion hangs on a special conception of what it means to be released into language; not simply learning the jargon of an elite, fitting unexceptionably into the status quo, but learning that language can be used as a means of changing reality. (Rich, 1980) . Nor is her cultural influence limited to literature. In the Notebooks she writes of 'the beauty of a landscape just at the moment when nobody is looking at it, absolutely nobody . . . To see a landscape as it is when I am not there.' Painters too may have much to learn from her work. This was the opinion expressed with some conviction for the first time by Herbert Read in his Letter to a Young Painter soon after the first publication of Simone Weil's Cahiers. Traces of FOREWORD XIII the connections he makes may be seen in the writings of the contemporary minimalist Agnes Martin, whose own advice and strictures to young artists resemble Weil's with regard to training the intuitive attention which alone in her view is the source of perfectly beautiful art. Reflecting the ten­ sion often experienced in Weil's work, she urges them to 'feel the pull' of life. 'We must', she says, surrender the idea that this perfection that we see in the mind or before our eyes is obtainable or attainable, a rather more austere view of Heaney's 'glimpsed alternative.' ( Martin, 1991) The value in Simone Weil's work attributed to being able to perceive without reverie, and to make an effort of atten­ tion empty of all content, places her thinking within the family of humane ideas which anticipates much in Gestalt and its later development in present-day psychologies. These in turn are intimately connected with Eastern mys­ ticism and their application, in the form of contemporary therapies, has permeated common experiences of healing. The process of decreation which she uses to describe the kind of spiritual stripping-down which enables a person to perceive and bear an undistorted truth, is an exercise now familiar to many who decide to make a radical reassessment and re-creation of their lives. RE FERE N C ES Heaney, Seamus, The Redress of Poetry, Faber and Faber, London and Boston, 1 995. Martin, Agnes, Agne s Martin, Kunstmuseum Winterthur, Cantz Verlag, Ostfildern, 1 99 1 . Murdoch, Iris, Me tap hysic s a s a Guide to Morals, Chatto and Windus, London, 1 992. Ibid. Existen tialists and Mystics, Chatto and Windus, London, 1 997. Rich, Adrienne, On Lies, Secrets and Silence, Virago, London, 1 980. Wei!, Simone, Oppression and Liberty, trans. Arthur Wills and John Petrie, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London 1 958. Originally pub­ lished as Oppression et Liberti, Gallimard, Paris, 1 955. Williams, Rowan, 'The Necessary non-existence of God' from Richard H. Bell, ed. Simone Weil's Philo sop hy of Culture, C. U . P . , Cambridge, 1993. PRE FA CE TO THE VIRAGO E D ITION @ The Introduction is based on the biographies and exegeses of Jacques Cabaud, L 'E xp erience vecue de Simone Wei! avec de nombreux inedits , Paris, Pion, 1 957, translated into English as Simone Wei/: A. Fellowship in Love, London, Harvill, 1 964 : New York, Channel Press, 1 965 ; and Simone Petrement, La Vie de Simone Wei/, Paris, Fayard, 1 973, translated into English as Simone Wei/: A. Life, trans­ lated by Raymond Rosenthal, London, Mowbrays, 1 977 : New York, Random House, 1 976; on interviews with the late Sir Richard Rees and with Simone Weil's mother, the late Mme. Selma Weil. The latter, already very old and frail, was still actively editing when I first met her in 1 964. She was kind enough to befriend me while as a recent graduate, under a B ritish State Studentship, I was conduct­ ing my own research in Paris on the work of her daughter. I am extremely grateful to all the many other Simone Weil scholars upon whose work I have drawn and which is cited in the References. ACK N OWL E D G E M E N TS Grateful acknowledgement is made to the following for permission to reprint previously published material : CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS for excerpts from Simone Wei/: Lectures on Philosophy , translated by Hugh Price, 1 978, with an Introduction by Peter Winch. Originally published as Le(ons de philosophie by Librairie Pion, 1959. EDITIONS GALLIMARD for permission to translate excerpts from La Condition Ouvn·ere by Simone Weil , 1 95 1. for her translation of Simone Weil's 'L' 1/iade ou le Poeme de Ia Force'. 'The Iliad or the Poem of Force' first published in Politics , November 1 945 . MARY McCARTHY UNIVERSITY PRESS for excerpts from Simone Wei/: Seventy Letters, translated and arranged by Richard Rees, 1 965; Selected Essays, 1934-43 by Simone Wei!, chosen and translated by Richard Rees, 1 962. OXFORD for excerpts from Simone Wei/: A Lzfe by Simone Petrement, translated by Raymond Rosenthal, 1 976. Originally published as La Vie de Simone Wei/ by Librairie Artheme Fayard, 1973. RANDOM HOUSE INC. and KEGAN PACL and TilE PUTNAM PUBLISIIING for excerpts from Waiting on God by Simone Weil, trans­ lated by Emma Craufurd, 1 95 1 . Originally published as L'Attente ROUTLEDGE GROUP ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS xviii de Dieu by La Colombe, Editions du Vieux Colombier, 1 950; The Notebooks of Simone Wei! Vols I and II, translated by Arthur Wills, 1956. Originally published as Les Cahiers de Simone Wei! (3 vols) , by Librairie Pion, 1 952-5; Gravity and Grace by Simone Wei!, translated by Emma Craufurd , 1 952. Originally published as La Pesanteur et La Grace, by Librairie Pion, 1 947; The Need for Roots: Prelude to a Declaration of Duties towards Mankind by Simone Wei!, with a Preface by T. S . Eliot, trans­ lated by A. F. Wills, 1 952. Originally published as L 'Enracinement: Prelude a une declaration des devoirs envers !'etre humain , by Gallimard , 1949. Excerpts from Oppression and Liberty by Simone Weil are reprinted by permission of THE UNIVERSITY OF MASSACHUSETTS PRESS © 1 958 by Routledge and Kegan Paul . For their contributions both direct and indirect to the Penguin edition, I should like to thank most warmly the following: Pamela Anderson, Christine Battersby, Barrie Hinksman, Catherine Hoskyns, Peter Larkin, Simon Lewty, Elsbeth Lindner, Pauline Matarasso, Patti Owens, James Ryan, Maggie Ross, Susan Visvanathan and Sylvie Wei! . I N TRO D U CT I O N S imone Wei! completed her last work in 1 943 when at the age of thirty-four she died in an English sanatorium. Two weeks earlier she had written to her parents : When I saw Lear here, I asked myself how it was possible that the unbearably tragic character of these fools had not been obvious long ago to everyone, including myself. The tragedy is not the sentimental one it is sometimes thought to be; it is this: There is a class of people in this world who have fallen into the lowest degree of humiliation, far below beggary, and who are deprived not only of all social consideration but also, in everybody's opinion , of the specific human dignity, reason itself ­ and these are the only people who, in fact, are able to tell the truth. All the others lie. In Lear it is striking. Even Kent and Cordelia attenuate, mitigate, soften, and veil the truth; and unless they are forced to choose between telling it and telling a downright lie, they manoeuvre to evade it. I do not know if it is the same in the other plays, which I have neither seen nor re-read here (except Twelfth Ni'ght). Darling M. , if you were to re-read a bit of Sh[akespeare] with this in mind , perhaps it would reveal some new aspects. What makes the tragedy extreme is the fact that because the fools possess no academic titles or episcopal dignities and because no one is aware that their sayings deserve the slightest attention 2 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY - everybody being convinced a priori of the contrary, since they are fools - their expression of the truth is not even listened to. Everybody, including Sh.'s readers and audiences for four centuries, is unaware that what they say is true. And not satirically or humorously true, but simply the truth . Pure unadulterated truth - luminous, profound, and essential. Is this also the secret of Velasquez's fools ? Are their eyes so sad because of the bitterness of possessing the truth and having won at the price of nameless degradation, the power to utter it and then being listened to by nobody (except Velasquez) ? It would be worth while to look at them again with this idea in mind. D arling M . , do you feel the affinity, the essential analogy between these fools and me - in spite of the Ecole and the examination successes and the eulogies of my 'intelligence' ? This i s another reply on 'what I have to give'. In my case, the Ecole, etc . , are just another irony. Everyone knows that a high intelligence is often paradoxical and sometimes a bit wild . . . . The eulogies of my intelligence are positively intended to evade the question : 'Is what she says true ? ' And my reputation for 'intelligence' is practically equivalent to the label of 'fool' for those fools . How much I would prefer their label . Nothing new about your prospects since my last letter (of 28 July; let me know by cable if you don't receive it) . Nor about mme. * A thousand kisses, darlings. Hope, but with moderation . Be happy. I hug you both again and again. Simone (Weil , 1 965) Since then she has become known as one of the foremost thinkers of modern times, a writer of extraordinary lucidity and a woman of outstanding moral courage. Most of her work has been published posthumously under the editorship of a number of people including Albert Camus, Simone Petrement, and her mother, Selma Weil. Several of the earliest English translations of her work appeared in American political journals of the late thirties INTRODUCTION 3 and early forties. It was not until the fifties, however, with the publication of Gravity and Grace, The Need for Roots, Oppression and Liberty, Intimations of Chn.stianity, Waiting on God, and the two volumes of Notebooks, that she became known to British readers. In the following decade two important anthologies of her essays and letters, trans­ lated, edited and prefaced by her English biographer, Richard Rees, made more of her work available (Rees, 1 962, 1 966; Wei! 1 965) . With it came a fuller account of her extraordinary life and the publication of Jacques Cabaud's L'Experience vecue de Simone Wei!. A translation of some of her essays on mathematics, on scientific methods and on the teaching of mathematics as well as essays connecting these with the religious and Hellenist aspects of her work, followed in 1970 with the publication of Science, Necessity and the Love of God. In 1973, the authoritative biography La Vie de Simone Wei!, by Simone Petrement appeared and J . P . Little's comprehensive bibliography . Now in its second volume the latter shows the growing interest in the work of Simone Wei! in most countries of the worl d . The Association pour ! 'etude de Ia pensee de Simone Wei! was formed in the seventies and in 1978 the Lectures on Philos­ ophy appeared in this country. Prodigious as this output is, it represents only part of her writing. Numerous articles, papers and notes remain uncollected and more importantly still, her entire written a:uvre in turn represents only part of her life's work. Although her academic influence has come to bear princi­ pally in the fields of philosophical and religious thought, Simone Weil's chief significance has been otherwise two­ fold. She is recognized first for her unique combination of thought and action and secondly for being one of the most remarkable polymaths of this century. She has come to symbolize a paradoxical, active non-membership of the con­ temporary Church as a social structure and to stand for those who resist the natural tendency which she saw within it, as within every collectivity, to abuse power. 4 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY What frightens me is the Church as a social structure. Not only on account of its blemishes, but from the very fact that it is something social. It is not that I am of a very individualistic temperament . I am afraid for the opposite reason . I am aware of very strong gregarious tendencies in myself. My natural disposition is to be very easily influenced , too much influenced­ and above all by anything collective. I know that if at this moment I had before me a group of twenty young Germans singing Nazi songs in chorus, a part of my soul would instantly become Nazi. That is a very great weakness, but that is how I am. I think that it is useless to fight directly against natural weaknesses. One has to force oneself to act as though one did not have them in circumstances where a duty makes it imperative ; and in the ordinary course of life one has to know these weaknesses, prudently take them into account, and strive to turn them to good purpose; for they are all capable of being put to some good purpose. I am afraid of the Church patriotism which exists in Catholic circles. By patriotism I mean the feeling one has for a terrestrial country. I am afraid of it because I fear to catch it. It is not that the Church appears to me to be unworthy of inspiring such a feeling. It is because I do not want any feeling of such a kind in myself. The word want is not accurate I know, I feel quite certain , that any feeling of this kind, whatever its object, would be fatal for me. (Wei!, 1 95 1 b) Andre Gide called her the saint of all outsiders and she wrote : . . . I should betray the truth, that is to say the aspect of truth that I see, if I left the point, where I have been since my birth, at the intersection of Christianity and everything that is not Christianity, I have always remained at this exact point, on the threshold of the Church, without moving, quite still en hypomene (it is so much more beautiful a word than patientia) . . (Wei!, 1 95 1 b) . By a strange irony, she who remained at great personal, some might say fatal cost, deliberately and conspicuously outside the Church, is known principally today as one of its modern martyrs. During her lifetime she wrote that she would only feel free to enter it if there were a notice on the 5 INTRODUCTION door of every church forbidding access to those in receipt of an income above a certain figure and that a fairly low one. Yet after her death there can hardly be a large church or cathedral in the world where her work is not now perma­ nently on display for sale. This anthology, a selection of some of her major works, is an attempt to connect the social , political and public writ­ ings of Simone Weil which she intended for publication , with the private and religiously based. Essays from the former alternate with excerpts from the latter. It is intended as an introduction to the work of an extraordinary woman, the ecumenical character of whose writing carries the pre­ Christian meaning of being addressed to the inhabited earth . Belief. Very different meanings 2 + 2 4, or : I am holding this pen . Here, belief is the feeling of evidence. I cannot, by definition, believe in mysteries in this way. But I believe that the mysteries of the Catholic religion are an inexhaustible source of truths concerning the human condition. (And further, they are for me an object of love.) Only nothing prevents me from believing that some of those truths have been directly revealed elsewhere. Adherence of the mind analogous to what is obtained by a work of art (the very greatest art) . . . (Wei!, 1 956) = A bibliography is included for those who want to read more of her work. Much of the latter is in the form of fragments or notes, short 'pensees' sometimes not exceeding seven or eight lines, many of which are brief injunctions, reminders or questions to herself, e.g. 'To look at a land­ scape as it would be if I were not in it', God{ea n ng man . What does this mean ? ' ; 'Laughter. Contradiction. Bergson . Value of comedy. Analogy between comedy (including Rabelais, etc . ) and ko-an'; 'Must not read into . ' Some depend on a key word or phrase; 'lever', 'blind man's stick', 'Louis XIV's smile', (Weil 1956 ) , which has particular significance in her vocabulary. Alternating with the essays are extracts from the notes entrusted to her great friend Gustav Thibon, and classified by him under certain cate' " 6 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY gories. These were to become known in English as Gravity and Grace . Extracts from the Notebooks themselves, though they would give a more complete idea of the as­ tounding breadth of her knowledge and interests, might have proved too cryptic for the purposes of the present volume. Philosopher, sociologist, mystic, teacher and political activist, Simone Wei! was many things to many people. Gabriel Marcel, the existentialist philosopher, represents the view of the majority when he warns against attempting to place her thought within any formula or to enclose it within any category. Whatever is said about Simone Wei!, he added, is liable to distort her; she must be allowed to speak for herself. T . S . Eliot, in his introduction to The Need for Roots , describing his first encounter with her 'great soul and brilliant mind' is similarly reluctant to use conventional methods of evaluating her work. He advocates exposure 'to the personality of a woman of genius, of a kind of genius akin to that of the saints' in lieu of the orthodox search for points of agreement or disagreement. (Eliot, 1 952) Comparing her work with that of Wittgenstein, Peter Winch and Hugh Price are struck by the 'almost VISIOnary ability' she possesses 'to draw together strands of knowledge from many different fields' . (Price, 1 978) They propose her Lectures on Philosophy as a companion to Russell's Problems of Philosophy , in intra ucing students to the subject. Her pupils themselves speak of her as a uniquely gifted and sympathetic teacher. Anne Reynaud-Guerithault was careful to preserve all the notes she took in Simone Weil's classes and writes lovingly about the integrity and humility of the young graduate . The miners' groups in Saint-Etienne remember her with great and lasting affection and refer to the deep joy of having known and loved her while she was with them. To her family she was the tenderest of daughters and sisters. Simone Wei! was born in Paris on 3 February 1 909 into an agnostic French-Jewish middle-class family. She and her INTRODUCTION 7 brother Andre were brought up in a comfortable, cultivated background. Their unorthodox and energetic mother, Selma, oversaw their schooling and the French educational system of the time allowed her a fair measure of autonomy in choosing appropriate courses for each child and in com­ bining state with private education. The two children were very close and both were intellectually precocious. After Andre was sent to the boys' lycee it was decided that Simone should attend that of the girls. Andre, three years his sister's senior, already showed a remarkable gift for mathematics and relished school . Simone , suffering from a physical disability, had a less happy introduction to the classroom. Her hands were too small in proportion to her body and she experienced great difficulty in using them. They were frequently swollen and painful so that through­ out her life the act of writing was for her slow and laborious. This in turn caused her mother some anxiety and she rue­ fully compared Simone's lack of confidence with Andre's joy in his lessons . As a young girl , Selma Weil had wanted to study medicine but her father refused to allow her to do so . At the age of fourteen , Andre had passed his premier bac and at sixteen was accepted at the Ecole Normale Superieure, France's most prestigious grande ecole . It was at about this time that Simone was to fall into what she subsequently described as a bottomless despair at being excluded from the 'transcendent realm only truly great men enter and where truth resides' [my translation : S . M .] . A careful writer, mindful of the significance of every word she wrote (Alain said that she hammered her points home as if writing with a navvy's pick) it is interesting to note that she uses the word 'men' specifically (les hommes authentiquement grands) . However, it was then too that 'suddenly and for­ ever' she gained the conviction that by longing for truth and making a constant effort of attention so as to reach it, anyone can attain it, whatever one's natural faculties. 'Under the name of truth' she adds 'I also included beauty, virtue and every kind of goodness' . (Weil, 195 1 b) The word 'attention' in Simone Weil's vocabulary has 8 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY particular significance, crucial to an understanding of her thought. It is not the kind of concentrated mental effort normally suggested by the expression 'paying attention', nor is it any particularly careful kind of scrutiny. It is rather a form of stepping back from all roles, including that of observer. It is a distancing of one's self not only from the thing observed, but from one's own faculties of observation. Attention consists of suspending our thought, leaving it detached, empty and ready to be penetrated by the object . It means holding in our minds, within reach of this thought, but on a lower level and not in contact with it , the diverse knowledge we have acquired which we are forced to make use of. Our thought should be in relation to all particular and already formulated thoughts, as a man on a mountain who, as he looks forward, sees also below him, without actually looking at them, a great many forests and plains. Above all , our thought should be empty, waiting, not seeking anything, but ready to receive in its naked truth the object which is to penetrate it. All wrong translations, all absurdities in geometry problems, all clumsiness of style and all faulty connection of ideas . . . all such things are due to the fact that thought has seized upon some idea too hastily and being thus prematurely blocked, is not open to the truth. The cause is always that we have wanted to be too active ; we have wanted to carry out a search. (Wei!, 1 95 1 b) So despite what she believed to be the mediocrity of her talents this conviction carric:d with it hope for inclusion in the realm of truth not only for herself, but for all, including the least endowed and most unfortunate, with whom she quickly aligned herself. A few years earlier, when she could be found nowhere in the apartment, she was discovered in the Boulevard Saint­ Michel below, attending a meeting of the unemployed. In her early teens, when the Weil family took a holiday in the spa town of Challes-les-Eaux, Simone got to know the staff of the hotel where they were staying and to discuss with them their working conditions. Scandalized by what she learned, she scandalized the residents even more by sug­ gesting to the personnel that they should form a union. INTRODUCTION 9 Thus the first stirrings of her interest in labour relations and in the nature of labour itself occurred long before Simone Wei! became an undergraduate. I n 1 924, the Ecole Normale Superieure was opened to women for the first time. The year after, Simone Wei! entered the khagne (a class pr�paring to compete for entrance to training college for professionals) at the Lycee Henri Quatre in order to prepare for entrance to the Ecole Normale. Unlike most British state schools, the French provide their sixth-formers with a very strong grounding in philosophy. The legendary Alain or Emile Chartier was at this time teaching at the Henri Quatre and his influence over Simone Wei!, as over Sartre and Merleau-Ponty, also students of his, was considerable. A friend of his, Lucien Cancouet, worked as a railwayman and was active in the C . G . T. U . , Communist-affiliated union. He was anxious to make further education available to his fellow trade­ unionists and enlisted the aid of some of Alain's pupils in order to help his fellow-workers gain qualifications after leaving school and also to provide them with the broad general culture which they lacked. Classes were held at a school in the rue Falguiere, in French, maths and physics with some sociology and political economy. Simone Wei! contributed to some of these classes while she was preparing for her own entrance examinations to the Ecole Normale. Her first attempt was unsuccessful, largely because of a low mark in history. Simone de Beauvoir, who met her as a student for the first time during this period, was impressed by her capacity to feel the suffering of others. In reply to Simone de B eauvoir's suggestion that the main problem in life was not to make people happy but to discover the reason for their existence, Simone Wei! said it was easy to see she had never been hungry. Her second attempt at entry to the Ecole Normale was successful. She came top of the list, Simone de B eauvoir second, and in 1 928 they entered the Ecole Normale joining the three women already there, nick­ named 'The Gleaners'. While there, Simone Wei! con­ tinued to attend, illegally, Alain's classes at the H enri 10 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY Quatre. It was in one of the 1 929 issues of his journal Libres Propos, that her earliest essay concerning the nature of labour was published. 'Concerning Perception, or The Adventure of Proteus' was an attempt to define work. She regarded it as true action, not that which emanates from the passions, from the unbridled imagination but action that conforms to geometry, that is to say which is brought into being through knowledge of the world that is gained by moving progressively from one simple idea to another. It is through work that reason seizes hold of the world. Simone Weil lays stress on the importance of advancing from one clear notion to the next. She believed, like Alain, that philosophy is the explanation of the obvious through the obscure. The connection between her experiences at the working men's school in the rue Falguiere and her studies at the Ecole Normale Superieure was crucially important. It provided the link between her most deeply held beliefs and the means of their implementation. At the School, re­ nowned for the independence of spirit of its students, Simone Weil acquired a reputation for eccentricity. Hers was not, however, the cultivated originality typical of both youth in general and of that decade in particular. It was a genuine nonconformity with contemporary social standards that required courage to maintain and which must have made her miserable. She worked phenomenally hard and whether as a result of doing so or of other factors, severe and near-incapacitating headaches, from which she was never entirely free, began during this time. She became associated with various pacifist movements. By brusque and uncompromising demands for support in signing petitions connected with them, in drawing up mani­ festoes and in particular with soliciting contributions for trade-union strike funds, she made several enemies . She was not widely popular with her peers but it was by the School's Administration that she was viewed with the great­ est hostility. This was to have serious repercussions when it came to her placement after she had received a brilliant degree in 1 93 1 . Having expressed a preference for a post in INTRODUCTION 11 a port o r i n a n industrial town i n the North o r the Centre, she was posted almost as far away as possible, to Le Puy, allegedly at the request of the Dean. During her university career, Simone Wei! had joined a group associated with the review 'La Revolution Pro/e­ tarienne'. Upon her arrival in Le Puy she contacted syndi­ calist groups at the large industrial town of Saint-Etienne, some seventy miles away. It was here that she began to frequent industrial workers' milieux for the first time. Al­ though she was working as an intellectual and being well paid for it, she regarded this as a mere quirk of fate and considered that since so many others had the right to no­ thing, she too had a right to nothing. Her career at Le Puy was dramatic and short. While teaching at the lycee she made weekly trips to Saint-Etienne to attend and teach at workers' study circles and to attend meetings of the militant trade-union groups under the leadership of Pierre Arnaud, recently expelled from the Communist Party. 'La Ponote' as she became known, donated the supplementary pay she got for being an agregee towards the purchase of books for these study groups. She lived on the five francs a day then being allocated as un­ employment benefit and thereby contributed substantially to the miners' strike fund . She very soon ran into trouble with the educational authorities in Le Puy, leading depu­ tations of unemployed workers into council meetings, writ­ ing strongly-worded letters of protest to the local press, carrying the red flag in demonstrations and allegedly incit­ ing workers to strike. She scandalized the people of Le Puy and was twice requested to resign her post at the lycee and to ask for a change of placement. H er awkwardness and dislike of compromise often caused distress to those im­ mediately around her. Recognizing her clumsiness, this time it was her pupils who were her protectors. There is no doubt that in practical terms they suffered directly in con­ sequence. At the end of her year at Le Puy, the examination results of her teaching were catastrophic. Only a fraction of her class got through their bachot in philosophy, whether 12 SIMONE WElL -AN ANTHOLOGY through unfair marking or because of her unorthodox teaching methods is not clear. Nevertheless, her teaching was unforgettable. Anne Reynaud-Guerithault, her student at Roanne, writes : Simone Wei! is by now already well known and is portrayed by some as 'the greatest mystic of the century' and by others as 'a revolutionary anarchist'. So I thought it would be of interest to introduce her, quite simply, as a teacher of philosophy. She taught me at the girls' secondary school at Roanne during the school year 1933-4. Our class was a small one and had a family atmosphere about it : housed apart from the main school buildings, in a little summer house almost lost in the school grounds , we made our first acquaintance with great thoughts in an atmosphere of complete independence. When the weather was good we had our lessons under the shade of a fine cedar tree, and sometimes they became a search for the solution to a problem in geometry, or a friendly conversation. I could waste time by reminiscing at some length about some strange rows that took place: the headmistress coming to look for marks and positions which Simone Wei! usually refused to give : our orders to rub out the platonic inscription we had written above our classroom door : 'No one admitted unless he knows geometry' . B ut I share the distaste of Gustave Thibon for such Teminiscences : like him, 'I loved her too much for that'. If 'a brother cannot speak of his sister as a writer can about a fellow writer', neither can a pupil speak in that way of a teacher she admired so much and who has had such a profound influence on her. One must aim higher than that. Long before she became famous, I had carefully kept all my notes of her lessons. Simone Wei! was too straightforward, too honest to 'cram us for exams' in lessons and keep her real thinking for other times . . . . I think I can declare that there are not 'two Simone Weils' as people are beginning to say. And that is why I have stifled my scruples, although at first I was afraid of shocking people. (People do not like to be suddenly presented with an image of an artist, writer, hero or saint which is quite different from the one they had previously formed in their minds. ) My scruples were vain. The Christian (by instinct if not by baptism) who, in 1943 , died 13 INTRODUCTION in a London hospital because she would not eat ' more than her ration', was the same person I had known , sharing her salary in 1933 with the factory-workers of Roanne. The same person , too, were the mystic putting the 'void' before the 'real' (the well-known call, as she put it, of the 'void' for grace) , and the physicist who, when speaking to us of 'verification' humbly allowed the facts to speak for themselves . . . . (Reynaud-Guerithault, 1978) · Simone Wei! described her own teaching in a letter to a colleague : Dear Comrade, As a reply to the Inquiry you have undertaken concerning the historical method of teaching science, I can only tell you about an experiment I made this year with my class (philosophy class at the Lycee for Girls at Le Puy) . My pupils, like most other pupils, regarded the various sciences as compilations of cut-and-dried knowledge, arranged in the manner indicated by the textbooks. They had no idea either of the connection between the sciences or of the methods by which they were created . In short, such knowledge as they possessed about the sciences could not be described as culture but the opposite. This made it very difficult for me to deal with that part of the philosophy syllabus entitled 'Method in the Sciences' . I explained t o them that the sciences were not ready-made knowledge set forth in textbooks for the use of the ignorant, but knowledge acquired in the course ,of ages by men who employed methods entirely different from those used to expound them in textbooks. I offered to give a few supplementary lectures on the history of science. They agreed , and all of them attended the lectures voluntarily. I gave them a rapid sketch of the development of mathematics, taking as central theme the duality : continuous-discontinuous, and describing it as the attempt to deal with the continuous by means of the discontinuous, measurement itself being the first step. I told them the history of Greek science : similar triangles (Thales and the pyramids) - Pythagoras' theorem - discovery of the incommensurables and the crisis it provoked - solution of the crisis by Eudoxus' theory of proportions - discovery of conics, as sections of the cone - method of exhaustion - and of the geometry 14 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY of early modern times (algebra - analytic geometry - principle of the differential and integral calculus) . I explained to them - as no one had troubled to do - how the infinitesimal calculus was the condition for the application of mathematics to physics, and consequently for the contemporary efflorescence of physics. All this was followed by all of them, even those most ignorant in science, with passionate interest and was very easily fitted into six or seven extra hours . Lack of time and my own insufficient knowledge prevented me from doing the same for mechanics and physics ; all I could do was to tell them some fragments of the history of those sciences. They would have liked to have more. At the end of the series I read them the terms of your I nquiry into the historical method of teaching science and they all enthusiastically approved the principle of such a method. They said it was the only method which could make pupils see science as something human, instead of a kind of dogma which you have to believe without ever really knowing why. So this experiment completely confirms your idea, from every point of view. Simone Wei!, Lecturer in philosophy at the Lycee for Girls, Le Puy. (Wei!, 1965) She shocked inspectors and rectors alike when, eventually relieved of her position, she announced that she had always regarded dismissal as the normal culmination of her career. While at Le Puy she had been allowed to go down a mine and described the inappropriateness of the tool used (the pneumatic drill) to its operator. 'At present he [the worker] forms a single body with the machine and is added to it like a supplementary gear vibrating with its incessant shaking. This machine is not modelled on human nature but rather on the nature of coal and compressed air . ' (Petrement, 1 977) To her mind, distortion of the correct relation of tool to user, one might almost say the reversal of that relation in capitalist production was the major problem to be solved in industrial relations. She visited Germany in 1 932. On her return she ex­ pressed her respect and admiration for the German working INTRODUCTION 15 class and in a series of articles pointed out the similarities between national socialism and Russian communism, to the detriment of both. No nationalist movement based on solid­ arity between classes would, she believed , avert the disaster to which the German proletariat was rapidly being led. U pon her return to France she was heartbroken and events were soon to justify her acute distress . H itler ordered the arrest of the most influential communists and after the burning of the Reichstag, at the beginning of the new parliamentary session in 1 932, he announced that he had no further use for the socialists. It was at this time that Simone Wei! wrote one of her most passionate political articles. Entitled 'Towards the Proletarian Revolution ? ' it was a scathing attack on ortho­ dox Russian communism which she saw as a dictatorship of a bureaucratic class. She believed that no proper socialist system would emerge until productive labour itself became the dominating factor. She castigated a new form of oppres­ sion which she called the oppression of the function. Trotsky, she said , had not gone nearly far enough in his criticism of Stalinist communism which she viewed as a system of production in which labour itself is subordinated, by means of the machine, to the function consisting in coordination of labour. This article provoked Trotsky him­ self who accused her of holding such views so as to defend her personality. She had written that true democracy is, by definition, nothing other than the subordination of society to the individual and that this was also the true definition of socialism . She had seen society as a force of nature as blind as all other natural forces and no less dangerous to people unless they could achieve mastery over it. ( Cabaud, 1 964) After her transferral from Le Puy she was posted to a school in Auxerre near Paris. Her reputation had preceded her and relations between herself and both the admini­ stration and colleagues were extremely strained. Her sojourn fell into the now familiar pattern of so-called tend­ entious teaching, angry complaints from school inspectors and anxious parents, examination failures from the ranks of 16 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY the best students, followed by ultimate transferral. Much of her time and energy now, however, was devoted to taking care of some of the refugees who began to flee Germany. H er severe headaches continued and if she made enemies from amongst her colleagues at school she was not to find sympathetic supporters within the C. G. T. U . , the most powerful of the French trade unions. Her article had aroused the strongest resentment and many workers con­ sidered that by it the actions of the Communist Party in the USSR, had been hideously distorted. However, her associ­ ation with union members continued throughout the time she spent teaching at a different school, this time at Roanne in the Rhone Valley. No amount of pressure or persuasion could influence her to behave with greater restraint. She still continued to take part in protest marches under the noses of alarmed parents whose children she taught every day. Accounts of her teaching show how deep was the affection and respect in which she was held by her students. Anne Reynaud-Guerithault remembers that amongst the most enduring lessons she learned from Simone Weil was that the intelligence shows one must not seek to under­ stand, that one cannot do good consciously, that all value and all virtue cannot of their very essence be understood as such . While at Roanne, a post which she had requested so as to be close to her revolutionary-syndicalist friends in Saint­ Etienne, seventy or so miles away, she visited them regu­ larly. She continued to teach in the study groups she had helped to set up there and to promote discussion of the issues she had raised in courageous speeches made at the Trade Union Congress in Rheims some time previously. There, though threatened with physical assault, she had openly asserted that Stalin was collaborating with H itler. She described the realities facing those now in flight from the Nazis and the betrayal by the Soviet Communists of their German comrades. These unpalatable truths were difficult to utter in such places and Simone Weil was not helped by her physical appearance and manner of speech. INTRODUCTION 17 She looked and sounded like an intellectual. She was care­ less in her dress, often had cigarette burns in her clothes, and spoke in a rather monotonous tone. Largely thanks to her considerable powers of analysis and expression, and the strength and passion of her conviction, she became a rallying­ point in the stormy meetings and demonstrations that took place during the famous general strikes in Saint-Etienne in 1932. She was not, however, relieved of her post at Roanne. At the end of her year there, she applied for a leave of absence for personal studies in order to put into action a plan which she had had in mind since leaving the Ecole N ormale. In her application she expressed it as follows : I would very much like to prepare a philosophical treatise dealing with the relationship between modern technology, the basis of large-scale industry, and the essential aspects of our civilization by which I mean, on the one hand, our social organization and on the other our culture. (Petrement, 1977) Simone Weil was anxious to become an industrial worker and a bona-fide member of the groups she had represented intellectually at meetings and demonstrations at Saint­ Etienne , Le Puy, Auxerre and Roanne . Before entering the factory she wrote as follows : Monsieur, I am late in replying, because the rendezvous has been difficult to arrange. I cannot get to Moulins until quite late on Monday afternoon (about 4 o'clock) and I would have to leave at 9. If you are free to give me an hour or two between those times I will come. In that case you have only to fix a definite meeting place, remembering that I don't know Moulins. I hope it will be possible, as I think it will be an advantage to talk rather than write. So the thoughts which your letters have suggested to me can wait until we meet. I will mention only one doubt which already occurred to me when I heard your lecture. You say : Every man is both a link in some automatic series and also an instigator of trains of events. First of all, it seems to me one must distinguish the various degrees of activity and passivity in a man's relations with the 18 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY trains of events which enter into his life. A man may originate trains of events (be an inventor . . . ) - he may re-create them in thought - he may enact them without thinking them - he may be the occasion of trains of events thought or enacted by others - and so on. But this is something obvious. What worries me a little is this. When you say that an assembly line worker, for example, as soon as he comes out of the factory is free from the domain of the automatic series, you are clearly right. But what do you conclude from this ? If you conclude that every man, however oppressed, still has the opportunity every day to act as a man and therefore never entirely forgoes his human status, very well . But if you conclude that the life of a worker at a conveyor belt in Renault or Citroen is an acceptable one for a man who wants to preserve human dignity , I cannot follow you . I don't think that is what you mean - in fact I am sure it isn't - but I would like to get the point perfectly clear. 'Quantity changes into quality', as the Marxists say, following Hegel. Both automatic series and motivated trains of events occur in all human lives, of course ; but the question of proportion enters in, and it can be said in a general way that automatic series cannot occupy more than a certain proportion of a man's life without degrading it. But I think we are agreed about this . . . . (Wei!, 1 965) She wished, by entering the manual workforce, to ex­ amine for herself the meaning of the phrase 'workers' control of production'. This is the pivot upon which both her social and philosophical concerns rest. 'She defined liberty as being neither absence of constraint nor a relationship between desire and its satisfaction, but as a relationship between thought and action. The free person is he or she whose every action proceeds from a preliminary judgement concerning the end which he or she has set and the sequence of means suitable for attaining this end. ' (Petrement, 1 977) Human beings are constantly aware of an unbending necessity or series of constraints which bind their existence, even if it be only the constraint of mortality. Being capable of thought, they may choose between responding like robots to stimuli that act upon them from outside or adapting to an inner representa­ tion of that necessity which is formed idiosyncratically. INTRODUCTION 19 That choice determines whether they are free or not and it is the possibility of making precisely that crucial choice which she believed had been removed from the lives of the factory workers. While near Saint-Etienne, she had made many friends, amongst them Urbain and Albertine Thevenon, militant trade-union teachers. The manner of their first meeting shows a certain ruthlessness in Simone Weil's character which many people found intolerable. She rang the bell and the door was opened by Albertine, one hand inside a sock that she was in the middle of darning. Having ascertained that M. Thevenon was in, she roughly shouldered his wife aside and walked past her into the room where he was sitting. The Thevenons record their surprise. Albertine subsequently became a close friend and wrote the introduc­ tion to Simone Weil's posthumously published factory journal . She, as well as others, objected strongly to Simone Weil's proposal of becoming a factory worker and said her miner friends had no sympathy for roi-charbon experiments of this kind in which the boss's son works in his father's mine incognito for a year before joining the board of direc­ tors. Secondly, they advised against this form of study on physical grounds . She was more ill-suited than most to perform the kind of work she proposed. However, she ignored her friends' advice and on her return to Paris took lodgings in the rue Lecourbe close to the Alsthom electrical factory where she eventually found a job as a power-press operator. To Albertine soon afterwards she wrote : Dear Albertine, I am obliged to rest because of a slight illness (a touch of inflammation of the ear - nothing serious) so I seize the opportunity for a little talk with you . I n a normal working week it is difficult to make any effort beyond what I am compelled to make. But that's not the only reason I haven't written ; it's also the number of things there are to tell and the impossibility of telling the essential . Perhaps later on I shall find the right words, but at present it seems to me that I should need a new language to convey what needs to be said. Although this experience is in many 20 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY ways what I expected it to be, there is also an abysmal difference : it is reality and no longer imagination . It is not that it has changed one or the other of my ideas (on the contrary, it has confirmed many of them ) , but infinitely more - it has changed my whole view of things, even my very feeling about life. I shall know joy again in the future, but there is a certain lightness of heart which, it seems to me, will never again be possible. But that's enough about it : to try to express the inexpressible is to degrade it. As regards the things that can be expressed, I have learnt quite a lot about the organization of a firm. It is inhuman ; work broken down into small processes, and paid by the piece ; relations between different units of the firm and different work processes organized in a purely bureaucratic way. One's attention has nothing worthy to engage it, but on the contrary is constrained to fix itself, second by second, upon the same trivial problem, with only such variants as speeding up your output from 6 minutes to 5 for 50 pieces, or something of that sort. Thank heaven, there are manual skills to be acquired, which from time to time lends some interest to this pursuit of speed. But what I ask myself is how can all this be humanized ; because if the separate processes were not paid by the piece the boredom they engender would inhibit attention and slow down the work considerably, and produce a lot of spoiled pieces. And if the processes were not subdivided . . . . But I have no time to go into all this by letter. Only when I think that the great Bolshevik leaders proposed to create a free working class and that doubtless none of them - certainly not Trotsky, and I don't think Lenin either - had ever set foot inside a factory, so that they hadn't the faintest idea of the real conditions which make servitude or freedom for the workers - well, politics appears to me a sinister farce. I must point out that all I have said refers to unskilled labour. About skilled labour I have almost everything still to learn. It will come, I hope. To speak frankly, for me this life is pretty hard. And the more so because my headaches have not been obliging enough to withdraw so as to make things easier - and working among machines with a headache is painful. It is only on Saturday afternoon and Sunday that I can breathe, and find myself again, and recover the ability to turn over a few thoughts in my head . In a general way, the temptation to give up thinking altogether is the most difficult one to resist in a life like this : one feels so clearly INTRODUCTION 21 that it is the only way to stop suffering ! First of all, to stop suffering morally. Because the situation itself automatically banishes rebellious feelings : to work with irritation would be to work badly and so condemn oneself to starvation ; and leaving aside the work, there is no person to be a target for one's irritation. One dare not be insolent to the foremen and, moreover, they very often don't even make one want to be. So one is left with no possible feeling about one's own fate except sadness. And thus one is tempted to cease, purely and simply, from being conscious of anything except the sordid daily round of life. And physically too it is a great temptation to lapse into semi-somnolence outside working hours. I have the greatest respect for workmen who manage to educate themselves. It is true they are usually tough ; but all the same it must require a lot of stamina. And it is becoming more and more unusual with the advance of rationalization. I wonder if it is the same with skilled workers. I am sticking it, in spite of everything. And I don't for one moment regret having embarked on the experience. Quite the contrary, I am infinitely thankful whenever I think of it . But curiously enough I don't often think of it. My capacity for adaptation is almost unlimited , so that I am able to forget that I am a 'qualified lecturer' on tour in the working class, and to live my present life as though I had always been destined for it (which is true enough in a sense ) , and as though it would last for ever and was imposed on me by ineluctable necessity instead of my own free choice . But I promise you that when I can't stick it any longer I 'll go and rest somewhere - perhaps with you. [ . . . ] I perceive I haven't said anything about my fellow workers. It will be for another time. But once again, it is hard to express . . . . They are nice , very nice. But as for real fraternity, I have hardly felt any. With one exception : the storekeeper in the tool-shop, a skilled worker and extremely competent, whom I appeal to whenever I am in despair over a job which I cannot manage properly, because he is a hundred times nicer and more intelligent than the machine-setters (who are not skilled workers) . There is a lot of jealousy among the women - who are indeed obliged by the organization of the factory to compete with one another. I only know 3 or 4 who are entirely sympathetic. As for the men, some of them seem to be very nice types. But there aren't many of them in the shop where I work, apart from the machine-setters, who 22 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY are not real comrades. I hope to be moved to another shop after a time, so as to enlarge my experience . [ . . . ] Well, au revoir. Write soon . S.W. (Wei! , 1 965) She was paid at a piece-rate and found that however hard she worked, she could not make enough to be properly nourished . The speed at which she worked was consider­ ably too slow since she could not train her mind to stop thinking. This in turn brought about anxiety and fear of not reaching the prescribed rate to be kept on and she lived from day to day in the constant apprehension of being sacked for not reaching the required quotas. The work was extremely hard and during the next year she was to suffer burns, cuts and abscesses to accompany the headaches which had never abated. She describes the reification of the individual in the factory as one of the worst aspects of industrial life and the arbitrariness with which the em­ ployee is hired, fired and manipulated. Under these condi­ tions the smallest act of kindness, a sympathetic smile, for example, comes to represent an indescribable favour. In­ evitably, despite certain allowances which her foreman made for inexperience, she found herself eventually laid off. There followed a period in which she went from factory to factory, frequently exhausted from walking after not having had enough to eat, looking for work. By this time she did at least have a work permit, which had been initially difficult to obtain. She describes the feeling of comradeship which she felt with some others whom she met at this period who were also looking for work as 'miraculous' . Her journal reads : Wednesday - (divine weather) with 2 fitters. One aged 1 8 . The other 58. Very interesting, but extremely reserved. B ut obviously a real man . Living alone (wife left him) . His big interest is his hobby, photography. 'They killed the cinema with the Talkies, instead of letting it be what it really is, the most perfect development of photography. ' [ . . . ] Affects a certain cynicism . But obviously a man of heart. INTRODUCTION 23 Conversation between the 3 of us the whole morning, extraordinarily free, easy, on a level above the petty miseries of life which are the over-riding preoccupation of slaves, especially women. What a relief, after Alsthom ! The young one is interesting too. As we were going along by Saint-Cloud he said : 'If I were in form (he isn't, alas, because he's hungry) I should draw - Everyone has something that interests him . ' ' For me', says the other one , 'it's photography . ' The young one asks me : 'And you , what is your passion ? ' Embarrassed, I answer : 'Reading.' And he ; 'Yes, I can imagine that. But not novels. More philosophic, wouldn't it be ? ' Then we talk about Zola, and Jack London. Clearly, both of them have revolutionary tendencies (but that's quite the wrong word - no , say rather that they have class awareness and the spirit of free men) . B ut when we get on to national defence we no longer agree. However, I don't insist . Complete comradeship. For the first time in my life, really. No barrier, either in class difference (because it has been eliminated), or in sex. Miraculous. (Wei!, 1 956) She found work in the Basse-Indre Forges where, much to her relief, she was not assigned to the conveyor belt. The next day she wrote to a friend : Dear Boris, I force myself to write you a few lines, because otherwise I should not have the courage to leave any written trace of the first impressions of my new experience. The self-styled sympathetic little establishment proved to be in the first place, a fairly large establishment and then, above all, a foul, a very foul establishment . And in that foul establishment there is one particularly loathsome workshop : it is mine. I hasten to add , for your reassurance, that I was moved out at the end of the morning and put in a quiet little corner where I have a good chance of remaining all next week and where I am not on a machine. Yesterday I was on the same job the whole day (stamping press) . I worked until 4 o'clock at the rate of 400 pieces an hour (note that the job was by the hour, at 3 frs. an hour) and I felt I was working hard. At 4 o'clock the foreman came and said that if I didn't do 800 he would get rid of me : 'If you do 800 tomorrow, perhaps I'll consent to keep you . ' They make a favour, you see, of allowing us to kill ourselves, and we have to say thank you. B y 24 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY straining my utmost I got up to 600 an hour. Nevertheless, they let me start again this morning (they are short of women because the place is so bad that the personnel are always leaving ; and they have urgent orders for armaments) . I was at the same job for an hour and by making even greater efforts I got up to just over 650. Then I was given various other jobs, always with the same instructions, namely, to go at full speed. For 9 hours a day (because the mid-day break ends at 1, not 1 . 15 as I told you) the women work like this, literally without a moment's respite. If you are changing from one job to another, or looking for a container, it is always at the double. All the same, perhaps I should have given way if I had been kept in their infernal shop. Where I am now I am with workers who take things equably. I should never have believed there could be such differences between two corners of the same place. Well, that's enough for today. I am almost sorry I 've written . You have enough troubles without my telling you more sad stories. Affectionately, S.W. (Wei! , 1965) None of the conditions under which she and the other employees worked allowed for the essential conditions she believed indispensable for dignity in labour. Among these prerequisites were the possibility for thought, for invention and for the exercise of judgement. After only three weeks in the Alsthom factory she had come to see herself as a slave and was constantly amazed, outside the factory to perceive that she was in fact like everyone else : 'How is it that I , a slave, can get on this bus, use it by paying my twelve sous like anybody else ? What an extraordinary favour. If they had brutally forced me off . . . I think it would have seemed perfectly natural to me. ' (Weil, 195 1a) Again she was sacked and after another period of unemployment worked at the Renault factory in Boulogne-Billancourt. The over-riding impression she gained from this experience was of the pli­ ability of human beings and the speed with which all feel­ ings of anger or revolt against inhumane conditions was changed to total submission. She felt exactly like a beast of burden. To Albertine again she wrote : INTRODUCTION 25 Dear Albertine. It did me good to hear from you . There are some things, it seems to me, in which only you and I understand oAe another. You are still alive; you can't imagine how happy that makes me. [ . . . ] You certainly deserved to get free. Any progress in life is always dearly bought. Almost always at the price of intolerable pain. [ . . . ] D o you know, an idea has suddenly struck me. I see you and me , in the holidays, with some sous in our pockets and rucksacks on our backs, tramping the roads and paths and fields. We'd sleep in barns now and then. And sometimes we'd do some harvesting in exchange for a meal. [ . . . ] What do you say ? [ . . . ] What you wrote about the factory went straight to my heart. I felt the same as you, ever since I was a child . That is why I had to go there in the end, and you can never know how it made me suffer before, until I went. But once you get there, how different it is ! As a result, I now see the social problem in this way : What a factory ought to be is something like what you felt that day at Saint-Chamond, and what I have so often felt - a place where one makes a hard and painful, but nevertheless joyful, contact with real life . Not the gloomy place it is where people only obey orders, and have all their humanity broken down, and become degraded lower than the machines. On one occasion I experienced fully the thing that I had glimpsed, like you, from outside. It was at my first place. Imagine me in front of a great furnace which vomits flames and scorching heat full in my face. The fire comes from five or six openings at the bottom of the furnace. I stand right in front of it to insert about thirty large metal bobbins, which are made by an Italian woman with a brave and open countenance who is just alongside me. These bobbins are for the trams and metros. I have to take great care that they don't fall into the open holes, because they would melt . Therefore I must stand close up to the furnace and not make any clumsy movement, in spite of the scorching heat on my face and the fire on my arms (which still show the burns) . I close the shutter and wait a few minutes ; then I open it and draw the red-hot bobbins out with a hook. I must do it very quickly or else the last ones would begin to melt, and must take even greater care lest any of them fall into the open holes. And then I do it all over again. A welder with a serious expression and dark spectacles sits opposite me, working intently. Each time I wince from the 26 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY furnace heat on my face, he looks at me with a sad smile of fraternal sympathy which does me untold good. On the other side, around some big tables, is a group of armature winders. They work together as a team, like brothers, carefully and without haste. They are highly skilled copper workers ; they must calculate, and read very complicated drawings, and make use of descriptive geometry. Further on, a hefty youth is sledge-hammering some iron bars, raising a din to split your head . All this is going on in a corner at the far end of the workshop, where one feels at home, and where the overseer and foreman hardly ever come. I was there 4 times, for 2 or 3 hours (at 7 to 8 frs. an hour - which counts, you know ! ) . The first time, after an hour and a half of the heat and effort and pain I lost control of my movements and couldn't close the shutter. One of the copper workers (all very nice types) immediately noticed and jumped to do it for me. I would go back to that little corner of the workshop this moment if I could (or at least as soon as I have recovered my strength) . On those evenings I felt the joy of eating bread that one has earned. But that experience stands out as unique in my factory life. What working in a factory meant for me personally was as follows. It meant that all the external reasons (which I had previously thought internal) upon which my sense of personal dignity, my self-respect, was based were radically destroyed within two or three weeks by the daily experience of brutal constraint . And don't imagine that this provoked in me any rebellious reaction . No, o n the contrary ; it produced the last thing I expected from myself - docility. The resigned docility of a beast of burden. I t seemed t o m e that I was born t o wait for, and receive , and carry out orders - that I had never done and never would do anything else. I am not proud of that confession . It is the kind of suffering no worker talks about: it is too painful even to think of it. When I was kept away from work by illness I became fully aware of the degradation into which I was falling, and I swore to myself that I would go on enduring the life until the day when I was able to pull myself together in spite of it. And I kept my word . Slowly and painfully, in and through slavery. I reconquered the sense of my human dignity - a sense which relied, this time, upon nothing outside myself and was accompanied always by the knowledge that I possessed no right to anything, and that any moment free from humiliation and suffering should be accepted as a favour, as merely a lucky chance. INTRODUCTION 27 There are two factors in this slavery : the necessity for speed, and passive obedience to orders. Speed : in order to ' make the grade' one has to repeat movement faster than one can think, so that not only reflection but even day-dreaming is impossible. In front of his machine, the worker has to annihilate his soul, his thought, his feelings, and everything, for eight hours a day. I f he is irritated, or sad, or disgusted, he must swallow and completely suppress his irritation, sadness, or disgust ; they would slow down his output. And the same with joy. Then orders : from the time he clocks in to the time he clocks out he may at any moment receive any order ; and he must always obey without a word. The order may be an unpleasant or a dangerous or even an impracticable one ; or two superiors may give contradictory orders ; no matter, one submits in silence. To speak to a superior - even for something indispensable - is always to risk a snub , even though he may be a kindly man (the kindest men have spells of bad temper) ; and one must take the snub too in silence. As for one's own fits of irritation or bad humour, one must swallow them ; they can have no outlet either in word or gesture. All one's movements are determined all the time by the work. In this situation, thought shrivels up and withdraws, as the flesh flinches from a lancet. One cannot be 'conscious'. In all this I am speaking of unskilled work, of course (and especially the women's work) . And in the midst of it all a smile, a word of kindness, a moment of human contact, have more value than the most devoted friendships among the priviliged, both great and small. It is only there that one knows what human brotherhood is. B ut there is little of it, very little. Most often, relations between comrades reflect the harshness which dominates everything there. Now I have chattered enough. I could write volumes about it all . I wanted also to say this : I feel that the change from that hard life to my present one is corrupting me. I know now what it's like when a worker gets a 'permanent billet'. B ut I try to resist. I f I let myself go I should forget it all and settle down among my privileges without wishing to think of them as such . But don't worry, I'm not letting myself go. Moreover, I said farewell to my gaiety in that life ; it has left an indelible bitterness in my heart. Yet all the same I am glad to have experienced it. Keep this letter - perhaps I 'II ask you for it one day, if I want to 28 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY collect all my memories of that time. Not so as to publish something about it (at least I think not), but to prevent myself from forgetting. It is difficult not to forget when one changes one's way of life so radically. S . W. (Weil, 1965) In her life as a worker she became strongly aware of two things. First that she no longer felt as though she had any rights and second that the idea of time was unbearable. The reason for the latter was that workers live in fear of what is to come, in the form of orders. Human beings crave warmth and fellow feeling at work. In the factory what they experi­ ence is 'icy pandemonium . ' Her experience was to leave an indelible impression on her spirit. She was as she put it branded like so many others with the mark of a slave. What had remained of her belief in revolution disappeared com­ pletely. She came to believe instead that the workers' capa­ city for action, let alone for revolution was seriously over­ estimated by the theorists of the day. She believed that no new technique, no re-adaptation of machines to their opera­ tors and no technical innovation would effectively alleviate the suffering which comes from the humiliation of being treated as an object . Not religion, but revolution, she said, was the opium of the people. Simone Weil had become very weak and ill during the time she spent in the factories. Shattered in mind and body she recognized her sufferings as 'biological and not social'. H er parents went with her to Portugal for a holiday. Leav­ ing them, she went by herself to a small fishing village where the first of 'three contacts with Christianity that have really counted' took place. As I worked in the factory, indistinguishable to all eyes, including my own, from the anonymous mass, the affliction of others entered into my flesh and my soul. Nothing separated me from it for I had really forgotten my past and I looked forward to no future, finding it difficult to imagine the possibility of surviving all the fatigue. What I went through there marked me in so lasting a manner that still to-day when any human being, whoever he INTRODUCTION 29 may be and in whatever circumstances, speaks to me without brutality, I cannot help having the impression that there must be a mistake and that unfortunately the mistake will in all probability disappear. There I r�ceived for ever the mark of a slave, like the branding of the red-hot iron which the Romans put on the foreheads of their most despised slaves. Since then I have always regarded myself as a slave. In this state of mind then, and in a wretched condition physically, I entered the little Portuguese village, which , alas, was very wretched too, on the v�ry day of its patronal festival. I was alone. It was the evening and there was a full moon. It was by the sea. The wives of the fishermen were going in procession to make a tour of all the ships, carrying candles and singing what must certainly be very ancient hymns of a heart-rending sadness. Nothing can give any idea of it. I have never heard anything so poignant unless it were the song of the boatmen on the Volga. There the conviction was suddenly borne in upon me that Christianity is pre-eminently the religion of slaves, that slaves cannot help belonging to it , and I among others. (Wei!, 195 1 b) On her return, she was appointed to teach philosophy at the lycee of Bourges where she continued her investiga­ tions into the nature of industrial labout. There she was fortunate enough to meet an engineer, M . B ernard, who was also the technical manager of a factory at Rosieres, not far away. Through him, she was ·able to put into operation an idea she had long cherished . This was to recount a selection of the great works of Greek literature, of which she believed the workers were the most appropriate reader­ ship. She believed that this literature would go straight to the hearts of the workers, indeed that their true message could be understood by none better. It is in respect of one thing only that human nature can bear for the soul's desire to be directed not towards what might be or what will be but towards what is and that is in respect of beauty. Everything beautiful is the object of desire but one desires that it be not otherwise, that it be unchanged , that it be exactly what it 30 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY is. One looks with desire at a clear starry night and one desires exactly the sight before one's eyes. Since the people are forced to direct all their desires towards what they already possess, beauty is made for them and they for it. For other social classes, poetry is a luxury but the people need poetry as they need bread . . . . (Wei!, 195 l a) Works such as these could act as what she termed metaxu or bridges between the world of the good and the world of the necessary. She began with Sophocles' Antigone , followed by Electra and they were published in the factory house magazine Bernard had started, Entre Nous . For almost a year, Bernard and Simone Weil corre­ sponded. He was anxious to learn from her experiences and do as much as he could for her and the workers under his control. He was generous and hospitable to her suggestions and relations between them were good . However, as news of sit-in strikes in Paris reached her, Simone Weil could not conceal her delight. Demonstrating a singular insensi­ tivity in the circumstances, she decided to send him a letter expressing her 'unspeakable joy and relief', which wounded him greatly. Although he could understand her having those feelings, he could not accept her gratuitous expression of them to him. Sadly, what could have grown into a fruitful collaboration between representatives of top and bottom of the factory ceased abruptly in consequence. This was the period of the Popular Front in both France and Spain, and a large part of the political writing of Simone Weil, that is, a large part of the work which she actually intended for publication (as opposed to that which appeared after her death) was accomplished during this time. She became increasingly interested, for example, in the colonial question and wrote movingly and ironically on the reaction of France to the attempted German occupation of Morocco. Increasingly,the concepts of state and nation­ hood became distasteful and meaningless to her, and she wrote now about the fictitious or imaginary character of each. INTROD UCTION 31 I n August and September of 1 936 she went to fight i n the Spanish Civil War and was for a while attached to a group of anarchists under Durutti , the main leader of the Catalan anarchists. An accident in which her foot was burned with boiling oil meant she had to be removed from the Aragon front to Sitges, with her illusions about the war equally badly damaged. My own feeling was that when once a certain class of people has been placed by the temporal and spiritual authorities outside the ranks of those whose life has value, then nothing comes more naturally to men than murder. As soon as men know that they can kill without fear of punishment or blame, they kill ; or at least they encourage killers with approving smiles. If anyone happens to feel a slight distaste to begin with, he keeps quiet and he soon begins to suppress it for fear of seeming unmanly. People get carried away by a sort of intoxication which is irresistible without a fortitude of soul which I am bound to consider exceptional since I have met with it nowhere . . . . (Wei!, 1 965) In the spring of 1937 she travelled again , this time in Italy. No one reading the letters written during this period could doubt the generous and exuberant love of l ife that was in her. In Spain she had met a young student, J ean Posternak, who had told her about Italy . To him she wrote : Cher ami, Your directions for the Maggio musicale were in l ine with my own inclination, so I complied with them. I had never heard Figaro , apart from excerpts, and as B runo Walter's conducting was beyond all praise you can easily imagine the impression it made on me. And yet the impression paled beside the Incoronazione di Poppaea , played in the Boboli garden amphitheatre under the stars with the Pitti palace for background . I bitterly regretted your absence, because it was a marvel you would really have appreciated, a marvel to be remembered all one's life . But I like to believe you will hear it one day. The public was cool (pack of brutes ! ) . Luckily, however, my enjoyment was enough to fill a whole amphitheatre. Music of such simplicity, serenity, and 32 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY sweetness, of such dancing movement . . . . You remember my reaction when you put anything at all on the gramophone after Bach ? Well, there are melodies of Monteverdi which I would admire even after the famous andante . This return to Florence has been a delight. If the first contact with Florence is delightful, how much more so to return to it as to a home after a short journey ! And that is exactly the impression I had . Definitely, I shall not go to Venice this time. It is certain that I shall love it (if only from deference to you) if I ever see it ; but it is equally certain that it will never be so close to my heart as Florence. The beauties of Florence are of a kind which d'Annunzio could never celebrate, or so I imagine. I say this in praise of Florence, because I am far from sharing your sympathy for the Fuoco , which you advised me in one of your letters to read. It is a way of understanding art and life which horrifies me, and I am convinced the man will soon be in profound and justified oblivion. I shall have collected in a short time at Florence a certain number of pure joys. Fiesole (whence I descended just to listen to Mozart . . . ) , San Miniato (where I returned twice , Florence's most beautiful church in my opinion), the old sacristy of San Lorenzo, the bas-reliefs of the Campanile, the Giotto frescoes at Santa Croce, Giorgione's Concert, David, the Dawn and the Night . . . and mingled with them some verses of Dante, Petrarch , Michelangelo, and Lorenzo the Magnificent. ( D o you know his poems? I didn't know till I came here that he wrote any ; some of them are lovely : Quant ' e bella giovinezza Che si sfugge tuttavia . . . ) Rossini, Mozart, Monteverdi, Galico - for I have just purchased his complete works and spent some luminous hours one afternoon perusing his extraordinary original insights about uniformly accelerated motion. That is as aesthetically pleasing as anything, especially when one reads it here. And Machiavelli, etc . , etc. How I wish I knew and understood the underlying connection between all these flowers of the Italian genius, instead of merely enjoying them on the surface . . . I have also made a mental collection of a great many Florentine 'fiaschetterie' INTRODUCTION 33 (charming word ! ) because I almost always eat in them (pasta al sugo , 70c . to 1 lira) and always at a different one . Near the Carmine (with the beautiful Masaccio frescoes) there is one which is always full of young workmen and little old pensioners who enjoy themselves by making up songs, both words and music ! How I pity the unfortunates who have plenty of money and eat in restaurants at 8 or 10 lire·. And just conceive that in addition to this I also frequent the House of the Fascio, in a delightful old palace where I was taken by one of the founders of the Florence Fascio - a railwayman by profession and a former trade unionist (this was our common subject) with whom I got into conversation at a cafe terrace in the Piazza Vittorio Emmanuele. In the Casa del Fascio there is an information bureau for foreigners, in the charge of a young intellectual - sincere, intelligent and , of course, attractive (they are chosen for that). In his office I met a marquis of one of the oldest Florentine families - very rich, very fascist, very interesting. Among the things he told me (I did not hide my own opinions) some were sympathetic, others less so . It would take too long to relate. At the Dopolavoro office I was given a collection of stories written by workers . Lamentable, compared to those in the papers I read (do you remember? ) . The fatuousness of paternalism in all its horror. To me, this is significant. At this point I must tell you about my meeting with your friend A. I would be very interested to know what he said about it, if he has written to you . . . I think that if you could have been there behind a screen you'd have had a good laugh . For my part, I have wanted very much for a long time to have a frank conversation with exactly the sort of young man he is - that is to say, holding the opinions you know and at the same time possessing intelligence and personality, so that he is not a mere echo . He seemed to me to be like that ; with one of those characters which always interest me, full of repressed ardour and unavowed ambitions. So I am grateful to you for the introduction ; but I doubt if he has any such feeling. I fairly made him gasp. And yet I didn't do it on purpose. He thinks that my legitimate and normal place in society is in the depths of a salt-mine. (He would send me there, I think, if he is consistent, as soon as his people govern France. ) And I quite agree with him. If I had any choice in the matter I would prefer 34 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY hardship and starvation in a salt-mine to living with the narrow and limited horizon of these young people. I should feel the mine less suffocating than that atmosphere - the nationalistic obsession the adoration of power in its most brutal form, namely the collectivity (see Plato's 'great beast', Republic, Book V I ) , the camouflaged deification of death. By contrast, what you wrote to me about Toscanini (you know what I mean) seemed like a great breath of fresh air. There are still men in the world who feel themselves compatriots of all men, in the noble tradition of Marcus Aurelius and Goethe. Thank heaven, the people who are obsessed by all these myths are not the only people in this country ; there are also men and women of the people, and young fellows in blue overalls, whose faces and manners have visibly been moulded only by daily contact with problems of real life . . . . (Weil, 1 965) She is brimming over with joy in everything that sur­ rounds her, finds in Stresa, Milan, Florence, Bologna, all that is charming and delightful. She listens to Rossini, Verdi, Donizetti, eats and drinks with gusto, looks at paint­ ings, frescoes, sculpture, goes to theatres and puppet shows, and finally makes her way to Assisi, where 'some­ thing stronger than I was compelled me for the first time in my life to go down on my knees. ' (Weil, 195 1b) Returning to France, this time to teach both philosophy and Greek at the lycee of Saint Quentin in Picardy she continued her prolific writing, arguing more and more strenuously against offensive operation in war and in favour of defensive guerrilla warfare which she considered both more morally acceptable and generally more effective. Her already poor health was beginning to deteriorate and in January 1938 she was granted six months' sick leave. She went to Solesmes, to the Benedictine monastery famous for the plain-chant of which she was particularly fond. During this short but significant period in her life, while she was listening to the music, when as she said, each sound as it entered her head felt like a blow, the thought of the passion of Christ entered into her once and for all. Here too, she met a young Englishman whose radiant face after having taken communion made such an extraordinary impression INTRODUCTION 35 upon her. They met and he introduced her to the meta­ physical poets of the seventeenth century, notably to D onne, Crashaw and most importantly to George H erbert's poem 'Love'. This poem was to have great significance in her life since : I used to think I was merely reciting it as a beautiful poem , but without my knowing it the recitation had the virtue of a prayer. It was during one of those recitations that, as I told you , Christ himself came down and took possession of me. (Wei! , 195 1b) The events that had taken place in Portugal, in Assisi and in Solesmes provided her spirit with a new certainty and her private writing with a new language . In her vocabulary was now included the word God. Her public writing at this time reflects secular preoccupations and it was during this period, from 1 938 to 1 940 that some of her most powerful essays were written, among them 'The Iliad or the Poem of Force', and ' Some Reflections on the Origins of H itlerism' . They compare the latter totalitarianism with the Roman civilization whose influence she considered to be at the root of many of the ills of modern society. A devoted Hellenist, she attributed much of what was worth preserving in the latter to ideas which the Greeks had held, and which had gradually been discredited. Chief of these is the idea of balance, the importance of which in all spheres of human activity she was at pains to emphasize. It was at about this time that she also began a series of notebooks subsequently entrusted to a friend, in which she would record her daily thoughts . In them is revealed her extraordinarily wide erudition ; her familiarity with and love of all forms of folklore from all countries of the world , including the Scandinavian , Welsh, Eskimo, German ; Sanskrit and the Upanishads, of Japanese and Chinese literature and culture, of mathematics, her real passion, and of physics and science of all kinds. She also wrote a play, 36 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY Venise Sauvee whose theme of rootedness and uprooting was to occupy her till the end of her life. Venise Sauvee concerns the attempted rape of the beautiful city of Venice by a group of conspirators as in Thomas Otway's seven­ teenth century Venice Preserv 'd or A Plot Discovered. One of the conspirators is eventually so touched by the beauty of the city as to betray the plot to the authorities, on condition that his co-plotters be spared . Venice is spared therefore, but J affier, the hero, sees the evil which he attempted to avoid being thrust back upon himself. He himself is be­ trayed by the Ten, the guardians of the city, who refuse to keep their promise of clemency to the conspirators, among them his best friend. As Jacques Cabaud has pointed out, the decisive factor is never mentioned in the play (Cabaud, 1 964) . It is not only the vision and memory of the eternal beauty of the city, with its canals and palaces, which would shortly see devastation , rape and pillage, but the beauty of the city as a kind of repository, which finally prompts the hero to betray the plot. The unforgivable crime that the conspirators would be committing was not the particular murder or robbery of this or that individual only, but the crime of uprooting. They would be robbing the Venetians of their enracinement. Later, while Simone Wei! was working in London for the Free French she was to write elaborating this theme and defining in detail the charge against the conspirators. Simone Weil's interest in the 'miracle' of Catharism centres on the fact that : around Toulouse in the twelfth century the highest thought dwelt within a whole human environment and not only in the minds of a certain number of individuals. That, it seems to me, is the sole difference between philosophy and religion , so long as religion is something not dogmatic. No thought attains to its fullest existence unless it is incarnated in a human environment, and by environment I mean something open to the world around, something which is steeped in the surrounding society and is in contact with the whole of it, and not simply a closed circle of disciples, around a master. For the lack of such an environment in which to breathe, a superior mind INTRODUCTION 37 makes a philosophy for itself ; but that is a second best and it produces thought of a lesser degree of reality. Probably there was an environment for the Pythagoreans, but tli.is is a subject about which we have practically no knowledge. In Plato's time there was no longer anything of the sort ; and one feels continually in his work his regret for the absence of such an environment, a nostalgic regret. (Wei!, 1965) Meanwhile, around her there was a very real consp1racy not to capture one city alone, but whole nations and a whole race . On 1 0 May 1940, the Germans began to move towards Paris. Under the Vichy regime, the rights of French Jews were being systematically restricted and grad­ ually reduced by statutory regulations published period­ ically in the newspapers. Simone Weil's reaction to their appearance in the press was to write a letter of enquiry to the Minister of Education. In this letter she asked whether she might be given a reason for the Minister's failure to reply to a previous letter of hers requesting a teaching post in Algeria. In fact, one of the many statutory regulations expressly forbade Jews to teach . This prohibition was in part, she said, the reason for her writing. She stated that she had read the statutes but was unable to discover whom exactly was referred to by the term Jew. In the most civil terms she explained that this was a point never touched upon in her studies and about which she felt an uncertainty the Minister would, she hoped, be kind enough to dispel . The crux of the letter lies in its implication that such statutory regulations had no legal worth whatsoever. She pointed out that it was useless to refer back to grandparents for definition as the regulations required, for, without knowing what constituted Jewishness one was incapable of knowing if one had three Jewish grandparents. She added that she did not seriously consider herself connected inti­ mately with a tribe inhabiting Palestine two thousand years ago. Personally she regarded herself as belonging to the French nation and the French tradition . Her letter was never answered . On 1 3 June Paris was declared an open city. The Germans 38 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY arrived that night. In the afternoon, her parents persuaded her, much against her will, to accompany them as far as Nevers and from there to Vichy and Marseille . Once having left Paris, which she had always hoped would be defended, she planned to join those in London who were continuing the fight there. This could only be done by going through another country. Her brother managed to get to the United States without too much difficulty and she wrote to him later saying she must above all avoid going over there to live. She would do so, she continued, only on one condition - that he convey to her the absolute certainty that she would be able to realize her project of going from there to England. She wanted from him the most solemn promise that official authorization for this last leg of the journey would be granted . It was at about this time, during the first year of the war, that Simone Wei! began to read the Bhagavad Gita and to read her own position into that of Arjuna. The Bhagavad addressed questions which were relevant to her concerns at the time, the purity of motive and of action in war. Now also was the time she began the study of gnosti­ cism and the history of religion which was to form an important part of her thinking in the remaining years . In Marseille she joined the Resistance network and her time there was spent initially writing for the war effort (including ' Sur les Responsabilites de Ia Litterature') and helping those whom she saw as unjustly treated. In this case they were, among others, the Indonesians and other nationals living in France who had been rounded up and put into camps. She was questioned several times by the police but continued her writing, publishing for the Cahiers du Sud and attempting to place another project concerning the creation of a front-line nursing squad . Simone Wei! believed that one of the main reasons for Hitler's success so far was that his troops, trained not only for much longer than the French and Allied forces, but for offensive rather than defensive initiatives, and lived a kind of ersatz religion. Hitler had created special groups, like the young, fanati­ cized S . S . , ready and eager to demonstrate suicidal daring, INTROD UCTION 39 the source of which, she believed was extreme brutality. Her front-line nursing squad would similarly capture the imagination by its great courage (casualties would almost certainly be bound to occur) . The symbolic presence of women in the front-line would be incalculably powerful . For the French and Allied soldiers there would be before their very eyes reminders of the values for which they were fighting and of the homes which they were defending. The Germans had the advantage of almost a decade's prepara­ tion for aggression and the inestimably valuable psycho­ logical advantage of progressing towards an objective . The French and Allied troops could only feel they were guard­ ing the status quo . Simultaneously, suspecting that she might not have much time left in the country, she wanted very much to know at first-hand the lives of agricultural workers . Through a friend , she met a man who helped her to find such work. This was Father Perrin, a Dominican monk then working with the many refugees who had poured into Marseille during this time . She liked him enormously even at their first meeting and soon arranged to meet him regu­ larly and to discuss not only the possibility of work but more importantly, religious questions with which she was becoming increasingly concerned. B efore long, discussion centred on the question of baptism . The burning question in her mind at the time, mentioned with apparent casual­ ness to friends and priests was whether the Church ad­ mitted salvation outside the Church . These concerns were to her of cardinal importance but very few people even suspected their existence within her at the time. During part of the time she was in Marseille, Perrin was sent to Montpellier. Some of her most beautiful letters were written as a result and an entire spiritual biography, an account of her life hitherto, survives from this period . Father Perrin did find her work of the kind which she had requested , where she expected to witness, as before, the extinction of her own intelligence through fatigue. With some reservations he wrote to his friend Gustave Thibon, a 40 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY farmer in the Ardeche whom she promised to teach Greek in the evenings after her day's work in the fields. Thibon was sceptical of the idea : . . . I am a little suspicious of graduates in philosophy, and as for intellectuals who want to return to the land I am well enough acquainted with them to know that, with a few rare exceptions they belong to that order of cranks whose undertakings generally come to a bad end . . . . Soon , however, he changed his mind and : gradually discovered that the side of her character which I found so impossible, far from revealing her real deep nature , showed only her exterior and social self. In her case the respective positions of being and appearing were reversed : unlike most people she gained immeasurably in an atmosphere of close intimacy ; with alarming spontaneity she displayed all that was most unpleasing in her nature, but it needed much time and affection, and a great deal of reserve had to be overcome, before she showed what was best in her. She was just then beginning to open with all her soul to Christianity, a limpid mysticism emanated from her ; in no other human being have I come across such familiarity with religious mysteries ; never have I felt the word supernatural to be more charged with reality than when in contact with her. Such mysticism had nothing in common with those religious speculations divorced from any personal commitment which are all too frequently the only testimony of intellectuals who apply themselves to the things of God . She actually experienced in its heart-breaking reality the distance between 'knowing' and 'knowing with all one's soul', and the one object of her life was to abolish that distance. (Wei!, 1 952a) In teaching she used the Greek text of the Pater, which she already knew well. This time, however, having resolved to learn it by heart, when she recited it a similar experience as when saying the Herbert poem overwhelmed her. She found the effect of the words themselves totally enchanting : 'the infinite sweetness of the Greek text so took hold of me that for several days I could not prevent myself from repeat­ ing them over and over again. ' (Wei!, 19S lb) From that INTROD UCTION 41 time o n she began to say it every morning with absolute attention . At times the very first words tear my thoughts from my body and transport them to a place outside space where there is neither perspective nor point of view. Space opens up. The infinity of the ordinary expanses of perception is replaced by an infinity to the second or sometimes to the third degree. At the same time, filling every part of this infinity, there is a silence, a silence that is not an absence of sound but that is the object of a positive sensation more positive than that of sound. Noises, if there are any, only reach me after crossing that silence . . . . Sometimes, also, during this recitation or at other moments, Christ is present with me in person, but his presence is infinitely more real, more poignant and clearer than on that first occasion when he took possession of me. (Wei!, 1 95 lb) She and Thibon read Plato together ; she did this with such educative genius that her teaching was as living as an orig­ inal creation . Thibon gave her to read some of his own unpublished work and from his farm she went to work on the grape harvest. She worked eight hours a day, every day for four weeks. When she returned to Marseille, the period that followed was one of the most productive in her career. From this time dates the essay on the future of science, including 'Reflections on the Quantum Theory', several poems, and the first of the well-known letters to Father Perrin. The latter had by this time made no secret of the fact that he wanted to give her baptism . She moved closer to the Church than she had ever hitherto been. She attended Mass regularly, chiefly in the mornings, Father Perrin noticed , so as to listen to the living silence of the church. She spoke long and often with priests. Writing to Perrin, she said that she was at this time more ready to die for the Church, however, than to enter it. I should like to draw your attention to one point . I t is that there is an absolutely insurmountable obstacle to the incarnation of Christianity. I t is the use of the two little words anathema sit. I remain with all those things that cannot enter the Church, the universal repository, because of those two little words . I remain 42 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY with them all the more because my own intelligence is numbered with them . . . . The proper function of the intelligence demands total freedom . . . . In order that the present attitude of the Church might be effective and that she might really penetrate like a wedge into social existence, she would have to say openly that she had changed or wished to change . . . . After the fall of the Roman Empire , which had been totalitarian , it was the Church that was the first to establish a rough sort of totalitarianism in Europe in the thirteenth century, after the war with the Albigensians . . . . And the motive power of this totalitarianism was the use of those two little words anathema sit . (Wei!, 1 95 1 b) For obvious reasons Simone Wei! had been unable to persuade her parents to settle down in a village in the South of France and cultivate their garden . Writing to a friend just before their departure, she said that she could not refuse to accompany them. She had hoped that their efforts to get to the US would not be successful since she still had no assurance from her brother that she would be able to get from there to England . She now considered Father Perrin a close friend and writing to him soon before her departure she was bold enough to chide him with possessing an imper­ fection, that of attachment. In his case it was to the Church , which she claimed he thought of as a home. She apologized for continuing to trouble him, saying she believed that within her were thoughts that were worth much more than she herself. The fact that they happen to be in me prevents people from paying attention to them . I see no one but you whom I can implore to give them attention . I should like you to transfer the charity you have so generously bestowed on me to that which I bear within me. She left with anguish, having decided that to remain would be an act of personal will. She was guided by the hope that in doing so she would be in a better position to promote the front-line nursing squad plan and to be included in their number. It seemed , she said , as though something were telling her to go. INTRODUCTJO:V 43 P. S . - You know that for me there is no question in this departure of an escape from suffering and danger. My anguish comes precisely from the fear that in spite of myself, and unwittingly, by going I shall be doing what I want above everything else not to do - that is to say running away. Up till now we have lived here very peacefully. If this peace is destroyed just after I have gone away, it will be frightful for me . If I were sure it was going to be like that, I think that I should stay. If you know anything which might throw any light on what is going to happen , I count on you to tell me . (Wei!, 1 95 l b) She also wrote to Gustave Thibon, virtually giving away all her notes and telling him that she would be happy if they were transmuted by his thoughts into something which he might like to publish . You tell me that in my notebooks you have found , besides things which you yourself had thought, others you had not thought but for which you were waiting ; so now they belong to you , and I hope that after having been transmuted within you they will one day come out in one of your works. For it is certainly far better for an idea to be associated with your fortunes than with mine. I have a feeling that my own fortunes will never be good in this world (it is not that I count on their being better elsewhere ; I cannot think that will be so) . I am not a person with whom it is advisable to link one's fate. Human beings have always more or less sensed this ; but, I do not know for what mysterious reason, ideas seem to have less discernment. I wish nothing better for those which have come in my direction than that they should have a good establishment, and I should be very happy for them to find a lodging beneath your pen , whilst changing their form so as to reflect your likeness. (Wei!, 1952a) She and her parents sailed on 14 May for Casablanca, and from there reached New York on 6 July 1 942. Once they had arrived in New York, she found that everyone believed it would be impossible for her to get to England . She used every contact and every possible means to get herself a job in England, imploring her old classmate Maurice Schumann to intercede, and pestering any and all those capable of helping her to achieve her ends. To Schumann she wrote : 44 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY Cher ami, Any really useful work, not requiring technical expertise but involving a high degree of hardship and danger, would suit me perfectly. Hardship and danger are essential because of my particular mentality. Luckily, it is not universal, because it would make all organized activities impossible, but as far as I am concerned I cannot change it ; I know this by experience. The suffering all over the world obsesses and overwhelms me to the point of annihilating my faculties and the only way I can revive them and release myself from the obsession is by getting for myself a large share of danger and hardship. That is a necessary condition before I can exert my capacity for work. I beseech you to get for me, if you can, the amount of hardship and danger which can save me from being wasted by sterile chagrin. In my present situation I cannot live. It very nearly makes me despair. I cannot believe it is impossible to give me what I need . It is unlikely there is so much demand for painful and dangerous jobs that not one is available. And even if that is so, it would be easy to make ont. For there is plenty to be done ; you know it as well as I do. I have much to say about this ; but by word of mouth, not by letter. It seems to me, then, that the best thing would be to assign me to some provisional work, which you could easily choose for me yourself, you know me well enough for that, so as to get me to London quickly, as quickly as possible; and then I could be transferred to whatever seemed the most suitable operation, after full discussion. I would accept any provisional work anywhere ­ propaganda or press, for example, or anything else. But if it was a job not involving a high degree of hardship and danger I could only accept it provisionally ; otherwise I should be consumed by the same chagrin in London as in New York, and it would paralyse me . It is unfortunate to have that sort of character ; but that is really how I am, and I can do nothing about it; it is something too essential in me to be modified . The more so because it is not, I am certain, a question of character only, but of vocation. In this respect, the project I sent you would have satisfied my needs perfectly, and I am very distressed that A . Ph. [Andre 45 INTRODUCTION Philip, Commissioner of the Interior and Labour in the National Committee of the Free French Movement] thinks it impracticable. I confess, however, that I have not yet lost all hope of its realization some day ; I am, and have long been, so convinced that it is a thing that ought to be done . In my case, there is other more urgent work at the present time, and I am hungry to take part in it without delay . Only arrange for me to come. I know it is difficult just now. But I also know that people do manage it, including women. I very much hope you'll be able to help . If A . Ph . could take me in his luggage, as secretary or something when he returns from here . . . . Anyway, I thank you very, very much . Kindest wishes, Simone Wei! I will very gladly do you an article, of course. You'll receive it soon. (Wei!, 1 965 ) She eventually succeeded in getting authorization to j oin the provisional French government in London . She was still haunted by the question of whether or not her ideas were compatible with membership of the Church and before she left she urged her brother to make sure he baptized both his children so that they would never ex­ perience similar wretchedness. On her arrival she loved London and found the B ritish full of humour and kindness. Addressing her parents in English as 'Darlings' from then on , she now wrote to New York very much the same kind of letters as on her first trip to Italy, rejoicing in the English spring, apple trees in blossom, gooseberry fools in the summer. She found digs in Notting Hill and became good friends of the family that lived there. She coached the boys, despite the long hours she worked at the offices of the Free French. There she was given the job of editing and collating material and writing reports on political documents emanating from France . I n the event, to her permanent and fatal chagrin , no one gave serious consideration to her request to be sent back behind enemy lines. Having read her nursing squad plan de 46 SIMONE WE/L - AN ANTHOLOGY Gaulle said simply she was mad. From this period, December 1 942 to August 1 943 , dates not only the book by which she is best known, The Needfor Roots, but also over a dozen major papers, translations of extracts from the Upanishads and notes on Greek philosophers. Not all that she wrote while she was in London has even now been published and it is clear that she must have been writing day and night for over a year. Only gradually did it become apparent that she would only be given work of an intellectual nature and that her requests to play a more immediately practical role in the war effort would be disregarded. When one of her colleagues was chosen to return to France, even though the mission was later can­ celled, Simone Wei! began to feel the disappointment , the remorse and finally the despair which was to weaken her spirit and eventually her will to live . She continued to write to her parents in New York the most cheerful letters, hiding from them the truth that she was gradually losing heart. Darlings, Your description in your last letter of your stay at Bethlehem gave me a lot of pain and pleasure at the same time . A lot of pain, because of the heat and other discomforts, and I do so want you to have nothing but well-being in every way ! At the same time I am very glad you don't put on rose-coloured spectacles when you write. I f the colours are mixed one knows one is getting the truth and letters can bring you really close. Naturally, it was the parts about Sylvie [Simone Weil's young niece] that gave me pleasure. You can never tell me too much about her ; I am insatiable. You cannot imagine what it is for me. It makes me happy both to think of her and to think of the brief but unalloyed happiness she has given you. I only wish she had somewhere to walk where there are no crocodiles of little schoolgirls. There seems to be nothing in her circumstances at present which could make her grow up as a 'Mary in tar' . 1 I am delighted, too, that the A . 's and the Reverends2 are nice 1 Presumably a reference to the Grimm story 'Mother Holle'. 2 An American clergyman and his wife who lived on the same floor as Simone Weil's parents (Richard Rces] . INTRODUCTION 47 and sympathetic neighbours. Remember me to all . And tell the young one that I think of her and do not forget her, and that I very fervently hope the spiritual good she desires will come to her one day authentically . Darling M . you think that I have something to give. That is the wrong way to put it. But I too have a sort of growing inner certainty that there is within me a deposit of pure gold which must be handed on. Only I become more and more convinced, by experience and by observing my contemporaries, that there is no one to receive it. It is indivisible, and whatever is added to it becomes part of it. And as it grows it becomes more compact. I cannot distribute it piecemeal . To receive it calls for an effort . And effort is fatiguing ! Some people feel in a confused way that there is something. But once they have made a few polite remarks about my intelligence their conscience is clear. After which , they listen to me or read me with the same hurried attention which they give to everything, making up their minds definitely about each separate little hint of an idea as soon as it appears : 'I agree with this', 'I don't agree with that', 'this is marvellous' , 'that is completely idiotic' (the latter antithesis comes from my chief) . In the end they say : 'Very interesting', and pass on to something else. They have avoided fatigue. What else can one expect ? I am convinced that the most fervent Christians among them don't concentrate their attention much more when they are praying or reading the Gospel. Why imagine it is better elsewhere? I have seen some of those elsewheres. As for posterity, before there is a generation with muscle and power of thought the books and manuscripts of our day will surely have disappeared . This does not distress me at all . The mine of gold is inexhaustible. As for the practical uselessness of my writing effort - since they refused to give me the job I wanted , that or something . . . (but I cannot conceive the possibility for myself of anything else ) . There i t is. The chance of your seeing Antonio1 is what chiefly interests me 1 That is to say : I hope you will soon get to Algiers. 48 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY now. But don't count on it too much, for fear of disappointment. I am still without any information on the suiJject. Au revoir, darlings. A thousand kisses. Simone (Weil , 1 965 ) After a year of superhuman mental exertion she was found one April morning, unconscious on the floor of her lodgings. She was in a very pitiable state . Tuberculosis was diagnosed at the Middlesex Hospital and she was taken for treatment to the country, to a sanatorium in Ashford, Kent. From there she wrote to her brother : My dear brother, . . . I have told our parents that I love London ; but the truth is only that I would love it passionately if the state of the world allowed me any freedom of mind . As things are, I cannot enjoy anything. Every day, I am more and more cruelly torn by regret and remorse for having been so weak as to follow your advice last year. As for you, if you now had favourable conditions for mathematical work I would certainly advise you to devote yourself entirely to mathematics, for good and all if possible, until the day of your death. Take good note, however, that I myself feel thankful every day for having crossed the sea again . But in the event of your coming over to us, in the moral sense, I have no idea at all what they would do with you . Not make you a soldier, certainly, as things are ; or more exactly, a soldier with special duties. But what? I don't know. And where? I 've no idea . . . . The B . 's are charming. Unfortunately I have only seen them once. I have work and , as usual, I am too tired to go about. The journey from my room to the office and back is enough. (N . B . Better not let your parents read this, although it's their custom. So take precautions.) Love to Eveline [Simone Weil's sister-in-law] , Alain, and my niece. I hope she still goes into peals of laughter. Salut, S.W. (Wei!, 1 965 ) INTRODUCTION 49 No one will ever know what was the cause of her death on 24 August of that year. There were numerous very obviously contributory physical factors ; the habitually weak state of her health, the unremitting headaches, massive over­ exertion, heavy smoking, and her disinclination to take nourishment. Richard Rees writes : her selfless id�alism and her extraordinary capacity for sympathy and pity and self-sacrificing kindness stand out conspicuously in everything that is known about her life . And as for her death, whatever explanation one may give of it will amount in the end to saying that she died of love . (Rees, 1962) After her death, as her writing began to appear and receive critical acclaim, debate inevitably arose over whether she had committed suicide and whether she had finally entered the Catholic Church. On the first question ; according to the doctor who attended her, death was due to 'cardiac failure due to degeneration through starvation and not through pulmonary tuberculosis'. (Petrement, 1977) Simone Wei! had shown ever greater reluctance to eat as her sadness and fatigue increased and while she thought of the severe restrictions imposed upon those living in France . She knew that she was considered odd in this as in much else. Deprived of the capacity to act, thoughts and ideas were now the most important to her ; having already conveyed them into the safe hands of Thibon and Father Perrin, it is possible that her own personal sur­ vival had by this time become a matter of indifference to her. In the operation of writing, the hand which holds the pen, and the body and soul which are attached to it, with all their social environment, are things of infinitesimal importance for those who love the truth . They are infinitely small in the order of nothingness. That at any rate is the measure of importance I attach in this operation not only to my own personality but to yours and to that of any other writer I respect. Only the personality of those whom I more or less despise matters to me in such a domain . . . . (Weil, 1 952a) On the second question she had always maintained that by entering the Church, she would be cut off, as she refused to so SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY be, from the 'immense, unfortunate mass of unbelievers'. While yearning for the sacraments, she would consider herself permanently deprived of them unless and until a time should come when she was no longer able to work with her intellect. In Ashford, according to the medical report, she maintained total mental lucidity ; her eyes kept their brilliance and she could read and write. She often quoted admiringly the reply given by a young seaman who, having performed an act of almost unbeliev­ able bravery, was asked how he had managed to do it. ' Had to' was the answer and in it is also the essence of Simone Weil's philosophy. It is difficult not to see in her tragically early death the unity and integrity she herself saw in the world. All energy, she claimed, comes from desire. When she was finally obliged to extinguish forever the only desire left in her, the energy required to live diminished till none was left to sustain her. Her spiritual and social legacy is incalculable. S he demon­ strates that it is possible to address questions of both ethics and metaphysics in the language and logic of materialism and politics. She shows the intimate connection between various disciplines, the beauty and power of mathematics, the relevance of the classics, and the absolute necessity for intellectual work to be grounded in the physical . She found ways to live, think and write which have touched all our concerns. Her work is the expression of respect for the human being and for the 'inarticulate, anonymous mass which has vanished'. She gives new and vital meaning to the phrase 'another world'. For her it means the world inhabited by individuals dead or unborn. She strips the phrase of old connotation and stresses the personal and social importance of being rooted in another world. Her influence as a teacher is profound not only through her striking powers of synthesis, imagery and analogy, but because of her definition of the purpose of education itself. It is to train the attention, to teach the attitude of intellectual waiting and to develop the capacity of the self to disappear. Thinking personally is to commit the sin of pride in 'forgetting one is God'. INTRODUCTION 51 According to Father Perrin , the last sentence she wrote in her notebook before her death was : 'The most important part of education - to teach the meaning of "to know" (in the scientific sense) . ' Possibly her greatest influence has been in, as i t were, demythologizing mysticism . She believed that the truths she glimpsed in her mystical experiences were simple truths, open to all , which had been deformed over time (since the thirteenth century in particular) by a certain patriotic and partisan spirit in the Church. The meaning of those ex­ periences was as clear as 'the love that irradiates the tenderest smile of somebody one loves'. Their reality is seized through what she termed the decreation of the personality. Decreation is based on the idea of a voluntary, unsol­ icited, unreasonable, unnecessary and absurd act. This act is an imitation of what she calls the abdication of a God who is entirely absent from the universe. The world is defined by necessity, within whose physical laws human beings are obliged to live and knowledge of whose causes and effects can be acquired. The attempt to acquire knowledge of its ends and purposes, however, leads to a cul-de-sac of contra­ diction which may be seized through the perception of beauty and of affliction. Instead of looking for a purpose in the existence of the world she focuses her attention instead on the reality of her love for it. In the context of her own death , the following takes on special significance : Losing somebody : one suffers because the person who has died, the absent one has become imaginary, false. But the desire one has for him is not imaginary. Must go to the depths of oneself to where desire which is not imaginary lives. Hunger : one imagines foods, but the hunger itself is real : seize it. The presence of the person lost is imaginary, but the absence is real enough ; it is from now on that person's way of appearing. (Wei!, 1 952a) There is an absurdity in the act of decreation, of ridding oneself of the personal and of all that is named ' I ' , and to Simone Weil the universe is viewed as a kind of absurdity. 'As a child, for a joke, hides behind an armchair from his 52 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY mother, God plays at separating himself from God through creation. We are this joke of God's . ' (Weil, 1950) I n order to achieve the impersonal, a humility is required which is not an attribute. It is not the opposite of arrogance for example, and can never be included in an opinion of one's self in comparison with a personal ideal. For Simone Weil there could not exist a personal ideal since what is ideal is ipso facto impersonal . Humility, she claims, is not a poor opinion of one's own person in comparison with others. It is a radically poor opinion of one's person in relation to what is impersonal in one's self. God or the Good, in refraining from intervening, by remaining supernatural and refusing to affect the necessary and natural order of things is power­ less. The imitation of this powerlessness on the part of human beings is a similar refusal to intervene in areas into which they are not irresistibly impelled and provided none of their actions is done 'for God' or 'for' anything. ' God should not be put in the dative. ' (Weil, 1 956) I n decreation, human beings perform only those actions which they can in no way refrain from performing and these in turn are limited by the quality of attention bestowed upon them. This part of Simone Weil's work is the most easily mis­ construed . Critics have seen in it either an authoritarianism or a laissez-faire attitude denying human responsibility for the condition of the world. Her notion of decreation, how­ ever, calls for an even more urgent sense of responsibility in human affairs than if God were present. This is no quietist doctrine. It is not a question of concentrating attention on a given phenomenon and then allowing other wills to impose themselves. On the contrary. She says, when God is 'emp­ tied of his divinity', involvement with the world is as great, if not greater than before ; only the relation to it is different. One must be committed without the use of will-power and highly conscious without being self-conscious. There is nothing which comes closer to true humility than the intelligence. It is impossible to feel pride in one's intelligence at the moment when one really and truly exercises it. And when one does so exercise it one is not attached to it. For one knows that, INTRODUCTION 53 even if one were to become an idiot the very next moment and remain so for the rest of one's life, truth goes on existing. (Weil, 1 956) One can be conscious of having used one's intelligence, or of going to use it but never that one is in the process of using it, and the sort of detachment to which she aspires is very similar to the intelligence. The image she uses to convey the impersonal instrumentality achieved through decreation is that of a blind man's stick . 'May the whole universe, in relation to my body be to me what to a blind man his stick is in relation to his hand. His sensitivity is no longer really in his hand but at the end of the stick.' 'May the whole universe become like a second body to me. ' The object is to 'obliterate from one's self one's point of view, to regard one's self as part of a chain of mutual compensations of energy'. Of the absent God who refuses to falsify by intervention she says 'He loves not as I love but as an emerald is green . . . I too, if I were in a state of perfection, I would love as an emerald is green . . . I would be an impersonal person. ' (Weil , 1950) It is impossible to love God if one regards God as responsible for everything. Those who have attempted to do so and have revolted against God have been unwilling to appreciate the absurdity and the subtlety of the act of creation . They have set human happiness as the ideal, measured against it the misery of their lives or the lives of other people and in a straight­ forward condemnation, blamed God for his obvious lack of success. It is as though angry shareholders had censured management for failure to reap their anticipated dividends. So as to limit actions to those one is 'irresistibly impelled to perform', Simone Weil advocates a radical reassessment of the validity of current methods of social communication and exchange. She believed that every person is an accre­ tion of attributes centred around a 'childlike belief that good and not evil will be done to him or her'. This belief con­ tinues, in the teeth of all the evidence to the contrary, and respect for its existence in others is, according to her, one of the bases of authentic exchange. One of the main 54 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY reasons that have prevented the survival in the world of the sort of exchange she describes (and which was present in societies that did not revere size or magnitude, in particular the Languedocian civilization) is that human societies model­ led on or influenced by the Romans have substituted in their daily lives words that in essence have no meaning for those that do. The development of the society in which she found herself living in France in the 1920s and 30s had come about with more regard for speed than for meaning. It had substituted what she calls 'salaries' for realities . A 'salary' is anything by which a person can be made to believe that the future is not made out of exactly the same components as the present. This is not to say she had no hope for improvement in human affairs or that there is not an urgent need for human beings to have faith in the effectiveness of their efforts directed towards whatever ends. What she held was that 'belief in' this cause or that should not be a substitute for the object itself as it nearly always becomes. 'As when one writes, one makes the shape of letters on paper with a view not to the shape but to the idea one wants to express. ' Often, too, the cause or belief can turn into deadening habit, stifling the life out of its object . When people begin to talk as exponents, adherents, members, of particular move­ ments, schools, races, nationalities, the impersonal in them is deformed and communication becomes impossible. Belief in the family, in love, in friendship, in revolution, in the future , and particularly in progress can become hindrances that interfere with authentic exchange. If it can be agreed that there is no absolute good, that God is absent, then so too is absolute evil and the imaginary battle between two fictitious forces waged throughout history in one form or other is equally without meaning. The objects of our efforts, she claims, ought to be not to seek to do good (for that can never be done intentionally) but to throw weight and support behind whichever side has be­ come the lighter or the weaker. The idea of counter-balance is crucial to her thought and underlies all aspects of it. INTRODUCTION 55 Balance, for Simone Wei!, represents a demonstrable truth which can be acknowledged by all . Philosophical truths, like all others, she believed were those which could be demonstrated as clearly and indisputably as the laws of mathematics and of geometry in particular. 'The ideas of limit, measure, degree, proportion, relation, comparison, contingency, interdependence and interrelation of means and ends . . . all the elementary principles of rational thought' were missing from the social sphere which she saw as 'peopled by myths and monsters . . . absolutes and abstract entities'. (Wei!, 1 962) She warns against the misuse of language in obscuring these clearly demonstrable principles. She believed that those who use language in their professional lives - journalists, writers, politicians and lawyers - have a greater responsibility than most to use language with care and regard for the truth . In her plan for the reorganization of the French nation after the war, the proposed penalties for deliberate distortion of language for the purpose of propaganda are severe. Most people in the world are what is called uneducated . Those who are literate and claim thereby to be able to exchange knowledge with one another through language have a special obligation to those who use different methods. To illustrate this she often uses the image of a prisoner in a dock, stammering answers while the men of the law keep up a flow of witticisms. Writ large, this is also an image of the state of most of the populations of the world in relation to the so-called developed nations . She wished those who use both speech and written language to be aware of the dual nature of language and to beware of its obfuscating potential. It is a theme which runs throughout her historical and political papers and finds an echo in her religious thought where she emphasizes that Christ specified 'where two or three are gathered in my name'. He did not say where two hundred, or fifty, or ten are gathered in my name there am I in the midst of them. 'Everybody knows' she says 'that really intimate conversation can only take place between two or three. Even if there are only six or seven present, 56 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY collective language begins to dominate . ' (Wei!, 19S l b) Very often communication is most effective through a silence as at the centre of music. 'The central point of music is the silence which separates a rising from a descending move­ ment . ' (Wei! , 1 956) She compares it to a wave whose shape is perfect just at the moment when it begins to disintegrate. The act of creation and of authentic exchange makes clear the nothingness from which it comes. It is as much a stripping off as a putting on . The nothingness governed by change from which it emanates, the absurdity which pro­ duces it and which denies it permanence, is often unbear­ able. Contemplation of this emptiness of meaning is most often avoided by use of the imagination. Decreation is the act of allowing moments, empty of meaning, to remain 'unfilled'. The imagination 'filler of voids' realm of the private, personal and partial is Plato's cavern, home of illusion and a safe bolt-hole from the light of shared knowledge. What is dangerous about the imagination is its power to prevent the mind from encountering head-on the notion of limit. The imagination tends to consecrate, sanctify and privatize ex­ perience . We speak of capturing the imagination and the idea of possession is always present in it. Reciprocally we say that a work of art has 'captured the spirit' of something. This is because the painter has imposed upon imagination the idea of limit which is provided by work. Left unbridled , the imagination leads away from the truth . It brings out old thoughts, old grievances to mull over or new fantasies to play with and in returning to them, desires to dominate them. This is always a false solution, she says. ' Not to think of something - supreme faculty. ' (Wei!, 1952a) Balance, or perfect equilibrium in the moral as well as the aesthetic sphere is achieved when no attempt is made to alter the distance between desire and its object and when the notion of limit is unchanged. In the last months of her life, Simone Wei! wrote a paper entitled 'Reflections on the Rebellion'. This was apparently the only work of hers that de Gaulle could be persuaded to INTRODUCTION 57 read in toto . It is interesting to speculate what would have happened if he had taken into account others of her proposals for the rebuilding of France after the war. Her plan for the creation of a Supreme Council of the Rebellion is alleged to have influenced the creation in France of the N ationa! Council of the Resistance. There was a very large difference, however, between hers and the plan put into operation. Hers was an international and European council, rather than a national one . It also called for the abolition of the old political parties whereas de Gaulle's council resurrected them. Historically, political parties have always laid greater stress on the rights of man than on obligations. Simone Wei! reverses this position and analyses the extent to which the idea of rights, including as it does an emphasis on the personal , prevents human beings from seeking the im­ personal in themselves which alone enables them to see the needs of others as clearly as their own . One of the most important needs of a new France if she was not any longer to be seen as a cold State, 'hitherto courted and flattered and finally calumnied and betrayed' was recognition of the need for roots. Of the work which she wrote on this subject Camus was later to say it seemed to him impossible to imagine the rebirth of Europe without taking into consideration the suggestions outlined in it by Simone Wei!. De Gaulle was less impressed. This is hardly surprising considering that on one occasion during her work for him she had also suggested that it might be 'dangerous to hold a plebiscite concerning a constitution drafted by a national committee appointed by de Gaulle at a time when de Gaulle is in power' . She always recommended the strict­ est controls on all powers, including should he be disa­ vowed, the death penalty for any President of the Republic. In The Need for Roots , she defines the crime of uprooting which , whether it be in seventeenth century Italy or twentieth century South Africa, consists in the destruction of physical links with the past and dissolution of the com­ munity. She claims that loss of the past in this way is the equivalent of loss of the supernatural , i . e . that through 58 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY which it is demonstrable that the good is different from necessity and whereby the dead can speak with an authentic voice to the living. The Needfor Roots is the most complete expression of her social thought. In it she compares and contrasts the two principal aspects under which she views society. The first is as 'the Great Beast' of Plato and the second as the reposi­ tory of cultural values that symbolizes respect for the past and aspiration for the future. Each collectivity is unique. There is an obligation to preserve its roots in the past to the extent that it provides sustenance for a certain number of people. But if the collectivities themselves are not nourish­ ing, if instead, they devour souls, there is no such obliga­ tion. Writing in the context of a defeated and humiliated France, she maintains it is the urgent duty of government to discover what the needs are of the souls within that col­ lectivity and draws up a list of those which seem to her essential . One of the major factors of the 'uprooting' of workers in France is the fact that their social condition is 'an absolute and perpetual dependence on money'. In the claims of the workers, what should be looked for are the 'signs and tokens of their suffering'. Often money is shorthand for the needs that workers have not been educated to express. The resolution of this problem which is essentially the technical one of judging and analysing the effect of ma­ chines upon the moral well-being of workers, is less difficult than finding the willingness to implement the necessary reforms. This is because since Richelieu, 'it is only the nation that has assumed the main responsibility of the col­ lectivity to the human individual , that of maintaining throughout the present, the links with the past and the future. ' In an indictment of patriotism, she argues that workers have always recognized the idiocy of taking the State for an object of fidelity. Workers, she says, have always been shocked by it, since their sense of justice is strong. She is undaunted by the enormity of the task facing the next government of France, namely to inspire a people. INTRODUCTION 59 The problem of a method for breathing an inspiration into a people is quite a new one. Plato alludes to it in his Politics and elsewhere ; doubtless there were precepts on this subject among the secret stores of knowledge accumulated in pre-Roman antiquity, of which no trace has been left. Possibly this problem and others akin to it continued to be discussed in such circles as those of the Templars and early freemasons. Montesquieu, unless I am mistaken, was unaware of it. Rousseau, with his powerful mind, clearly recognized its existence, but didn't go any further. The men of 1 789 do not appear to have had any inkling of it. I n 1 793 , without people having gone to the trouble o f raising the problem, still less of investigating it, hasty solutions were improvised, such as festivals in honour of the Supreme Being, of the Goddess of Reason, which were just ridiculous and odious . I n the nineteenth century, the level o f general intelligence had descended very far below the point at which such questions are raised. I n our own day, people have investigated and penetrated deeply into the problem of propaganda. H itler, in particular, has made lasting contributions on this subject to the store of human knowledge. But it is an altogether different problem . Propaganda is not directed towards creating an inspiration : it closes, seals up all the openings through which an inspiration might pass ; it fills the whole spirit with fanaticism. Its measures cannot be suitable for obtaining a contrary objective. Nor is it just a question of adopting reverse measures : the causal connection is not so simple . It must not be thought either that the inspiring of a people is a mystery reserved to God alone, and for which, consequently, no method exists. The supreme and perfect state of mystical contemplation is something that is infinitely more mysterious still, and yet St. John of the Cross wrote treatises on the method of attaining to such a state, which, by their scientific precision, are far and away superior to anything produced by the psychologists or professors of our own time. If he felt called upon to do this, he was doubtless right, for he was certainly competent ; the beauty of his writings is a sufficiently clear indication of their authenticity. Actually, from remote antiquity, long before Christianity, right up to the latter half of the Renaissance, it was always universally recognized that there is a method to be followed in spiritual matters and in everything connected with the soul's welfare. The ever greater methodical control which men 60 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY have exercised over matter since the sixteenth century has led them to believe, by way of contrast, that the things of the soul are either arbitrary or else bound up with some form of magic, with the immediate efficacy of intentions and words. Such is not the case . Everything in creation is dependent on method, including the points of intersection between this world and the next. That is what the word Logos indicates, signifying connection even more than word. The method merely differs according to the different sphere. The higher one goes, the more rigorous and precise it becomes. It would be strange, indeed , if the order of material things were to reflect more of divine wisdom than that of spiritual things. The contrary is true. It is unfortunate for us that this problem, in regard to which , unless I am wrong, we have nothing we can look to for guidance, should be precisely the one that requires today the most urgent solution on our part, under pain not so much of disappearing altogether as of never having really existed. (Wei!, 1952b) Never since the Renaissance have public activities been visualized as other than a means of establishing a particular form of power regarded as desirable for one reason or an­ other. But, she says, power is not an end . 'By nature, in essence and by definition, it constitutes a means. It is to politics what a piano is to musical composition . . . we had confused the manufacture of a piano with the composition of a sonata. ' She asks who would be willing to implement new solutions and who would set the idea of greatness high enough aims in the new France. What had hitherto held sway was a false notion of greatness which did not differ fundamentally from that of Hitler. What is necessary is to give up the adulation of force. Two phenomena had contributed to the disaster befalling France. The first was the power of the idea of force and the second was the post-sixteenth century conception of science. Science teaches that force controls everything, yet we know from experience that justice is not unreal . There is only one possible choice to be made. Either we must per­ ceive in the universe, alongside force, a principle of a dif­ ferent kind or else we must recognize force as being the unique and sovereign ruler over human relations . Since we INTRODUCTION 61 know that justice is 'real enough in the hearts of men' it must be the modern conception of science that is wrong. It is wrong, she suggests, because science is no longer re­ garded as a religious subject 'as physical labour was re­ garded as sacred' by the Greeks. For the Greeks, physical labour was the direct expression of religious faith . Their science was rooted in the idea that one must not look for the unlimited in what is limited. Modern science, however, expanding towards space, and not recognizing a merely global responsibility, was cut off from that root four hundred years ago. She argues for a return to it and a recognition of the sacred nature of physi­ cal labour. This recognition is at the core of the new society she wishes to help form . Physical labour is a daily death. To labour is to place one's own being, body and soul, in the circuit of inert matter, turn it into an intermediary between one state and another of a fragment of matter, make of it an instrument. The labourer turns his body and soul into an appendix of the tool which he handles. The movements of the body and the concentration of the mind are a function of the requirements of the tool, which itself is adapted to the matter being worked upon. Death and labour are things of necessity and not choice. The world only gives itself to man in the form of food and warmth if man gives himself to the world in the form of labour. But death and labour can be submitted to either in an attitude of revolt or in one of consent. They can be submitted to either in their naked truth or else wrapped around with lies . . . . (Wei), 1 952b) 'Analysis of Oppression', part of a very long article en­ titled ' Reflections on the Causes of Liberty and Social Oppression' was begun ten years before The Need for Roots when Simone Wei! was in her early twenties . There is a story attached to it which shows again that somewhat sur­ prising characteristic which made her appear either naive or unfeeling. She herself was only too aware of it. From Marseille in 1940, she wrote to her friend Simone Petrement asking what had happened to some verses and other litera­ ture left behind in the Weils' hurried escape from Paris. 62 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY Aware of its importance and believing herself to have the only copy of the Reflections on the Causes of Freedom and Social Oppression , of which the essay reproduced here forms only a quarter, Simone Petrement wrote out by hand the entire work. When she saw Simone Weil a year later, she mentioned having made a copy in case something should happen in those dangerous times to the original. Simone Weil replied that it would have been better if Petrement had used the time for her own work. In the article she claims that Marxism, while unifying efforts to validate the scientific method and throw off oppression does not adequately explain the mstability of power and the reasons why, as human beings come increas­ ingly through technical progress to dominate nature, they remain incapable of dominating forces of control . H er con­ clusion is that subjection is the natural condition of human beings in a world where the idea of servitude has become confused with that of servility, and where the inquisitive and acquisitive take precedence in human affairs over the contemplative. The faculty of consent has less meaning, if any, than the faculty of control and has come to be held in contempt. By exercising the faculty of consent and remain­ ing disponible what she is advocating is not the forelock­ touching servility that bows to superior strength, and cer­ tainly not a cowardly obedience to the mechanics of capital­ ism but an informed and mature stoicism, an amorfati that considers all human endeavour and behaviour as subject to laws to the same extent as matter. The nature and character of the laws are variable but subjection to them remains constant and invariable. She suggests that Marxism pro­ vides an analysis of a specific force but allows this particular one to overshadow the notion of subjection itself, which she considers more important. 'The Iliad or the Poem of Force' is about this very idea. It is a seminal essay of Simone Weil's published in D ecember 1 940 and January 194 1 under the rough anagram, Emile Navis, of her name. In 1945 , when Simone Weil was still virtually unknown in the English speaking world, Mary INTROD UCTION 63 McCarthy wrote the beautiful translation of it which is reproduced here . It is the most powerful argument 'not to admire force, not to hate the enemy and not to scorn the unfortunate' . This is close to the spirit of Greenham and Comiso and other women's peace camps throughout the world . Once the experience o f war makes visible the possibility o f death that lies locked up in each moment, our thoughts cannot travel from one day to the next without meeting death's face . The mind is then strung up to a pitch it can stand for only a short time ; but each new dawn reintroduces the same necessity ; and days piled on days make years. On each one of these days the soul suffers violence. Regularly, every morning, the soul castrates itself of aspiration, for thought cannot journey through time without meeting death on the way. Thus war effaces all conceptions of purpose or goal, including even its own 'war aims'. It effaces the very notion of war's being brought to an end . (Wei!, 1 945) The beauty of the Iliad, however, lies not only in not glamorizing society which makes man make war, but in painting the nature of force itself, to which society too is subject . The author of the Iliad speaks of the petrifactive power of force, of its power to turn people into stone and make them into things. Simone Wei! comments that it is difficult to tell whether the author is a Greek or a Trojan . Her great message is that it is a matter of urgency to discover why such poetry comes into being so rarely and how the spirit which informs it and recognizes so clearly the identical nature of the subjection to force of both victor and loser, master and slave, may be restored. If the Iliad is a stark portrayal of the powerlessness of human nature in relation to force, what has come to be celebrated, mistakenly in her view, in later centuries is the collective power of society against it . This is what human beings have come eventually in the shape of the nation or the state, to worship . In the essay ' Human Personality', she examines the idea of justice, and concludes that the 'subor­ dination of the person to the collectivity is in the nature of things, like the inferiority of a gram to a kilogram on the 64 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY scales. But there can be a scales on which the gram out­ weighs the kilogram. It is only necessary for one arm to be more than a thousand times as long as the other. The law of equilibrium easily overcomes an inequality of weight. . . . ' (Weil, 1 962) Safeguarding of the 'person' is only possible when 'Je est un autre '. This is the link between her social and religious thought. When we know that everything we mean by ' I ' is other than it seems to us, then a balance is produced between others, whose limits are identical, and ourselves. Equal weight attaches to each, and a point estab­ lished upon which social justice may be based . This the 'realm of the real', where as she put it, one can breathe. In a letter to Joe Bousquet, a poet and crippled veteran of the First World War, she wrote : Cher ami, First of all , thank you for what you have just done for me . I f your letter is effective, as I hope, you will have done it, not for me but for others through me, for your younger brothers who should be infinitely dear to you since the same fate has struck them . Perhaps some of them will owe to you, just before the moment of death, the solace of an exchange of sympathy. You are specially privileged in that the present state of the world is a reality for you . Perhaps even more so than for those who at this moment are killing and dying, wounding and being wounded, because they are taken unawares, without knowing where they are or what is happening to them ; and , like you in your time, they are unable to think thoughts appropriate to their situation. As for the others, the people here for example, what is happening is a confused nightmare for some of them, though very few, and for the majority it is a vague background like a theatrical drop-scene. In either case it is unreal. But you, on the other hand, for twenty years you have been repeating in thought that destiny which seized and then released so many men, but which seized you permanently ; and which now returns again to seize millions of men. You, I repeat, are now really equipped to think it. Or if you are still not quite ready - as I think you are not - you have at least only a thin shell to break before emerging from the darkness inside the egg into the light of truth . It is a very ancient image . The egg is this world we see . The bird in it is Love, the Love which is God himself and which INTRODUCTION 65 lives in the depths of every man, though at first as an invisible seed. When the shell is broken and the being is released , it still has this same world before it. But it is no longer inside. Space is opened and torn apart. The spirit, leaving the miserable body in some corner, is transported to a point outside space, which is not a point of view, which has no perspective, but from which this world is seen as it is, unconfused by perspective. Compared to what it is inside the egg, space has become an infinity to the second or rather the third power. The moment stands still . The whole of space is filled, even though sounds can be heard, with a dense silence which is not an absence of sound but is a positive object of sensation ; it is the secret word, the word of Love who holds us in his arms from the beginning. (Weil , 1965) There has always been in the popular literature which sur­ rounds her name in this country a tendency to make of Simone Weil a latter-day saint, an absurd absolutist or to impose upon her stereotypes with which every woman is familiar. Many of the articles written about her reflect in their titles ('Passions of the Red Virgin', 'Bluestocking or Saint ?', 'Sergeant-Major Angel') the sexism she endured during her lifetime . Many of her most ardent champions have bestowed upon her the ultimate accolade ('Donna Quixote', Brave Men ) of honorary male status. Many, emphasizing the most negative aspects of her work, have placed her sorrowfully in the category of a 'dolorosa'. 'It is all too easy , ' as her first English biographer wrote, 'to dramatize Simone Weil as a sort of Saint Joan of the Workshops or to sentimentalize her as an up-to-date blend of Hypatia and the Little Flowe r . ' ( Rees, 1 966) This kind o f marginalizing i s deadly. It kills the very thing it purports to celebrate. Simone Weil's courage and endurance against the temptation of 'loving only in the imagination' was not so much a matter of saintliness as of attention . Simone Petrement, herself a graduate of the Ecole Normale, a contemporary of Simone Weil's there and one of her greatest friends, writes of the way people tended to regard her during her lifetime. They had the impression that some element of common humanity was missing in her - the very thickness of nature so to speak. 66 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY Indeed one senses that many of her old classmates, when they finally read her writings, were surprised to discover that she was so human. I myself was astonished by the incredible sensitivity she revealed. Certainly, when it came to generosity, a concern and pity for others, nobody has ever denied that she had these qualities, and in the highest, most selfless forms. In this sense she was more human than anyone else. But what was hard to believe was that she had the ordinary human frailties. One might even think that she didn't have the same needs or the same desires as others, that she was not wounded or hurt by the same things. She forbade herself all weakness with such firm determination that one could mistake for a peculiarity of her nature what was in truth a product of her will . As for the plans she had already formed , her whole conception of what she wanted to do with her life, it was . . . as she herself later said . . . a great misfortune to have been born a female. So she decided to reduce this obstacle as much as possible by disregarding it, that is to say, by giving up any desire to think of herself as a woman or to be regarded as such by others, at least for a set period of time. It was perhaps this that made many people consider her in some way inhuman. (Petrement, 1 977) Absence of weakness and frailty do not always indicate that 'some element of common humanity' is missing in a person . Yet curiosity is still expressed over her apparent asexuality or by the absence in her adult life, at least, of any important emotional or sexual relationship . Writing to a student who had asked for her advice about love, she refers to the 'terri­ fying risk, if one is the object of deep love, of becoming the arbiter of another human existence' . Just as she had advised her students not to seek truths, she advised her not to avoid love but not to seek it either. Her passion for justice, her love and respect for the individual and the fear, through attachment, of adversely affecting the life of another ac­ count for Simone Weil's determination not to express the very deep emotional life that was so obviously within her. Her disregard for conventional dress, behaviour, manner and appearance made her conspicuous and she felt it keenly. The great misfortune is that she should have believed that outside her family she was never loved, nor should be. She 67 INTRODUCTION was indeed much loved, as countless testaments after her death amply show . Wittily summing up her refusal of the martyr's crown, Thibon , one of the many whose lives were profoundly and permanently affected by her, writes : In the great volume of the universe, as she read it, her ego was like a word which she had succeeded, perhaps, in erasing, but it was still underlined. LOVE Love bade me welcome : yet my soul drew back, Guiltie of dust and sinne . But quick-ey'd Love, observing me grow slack From my first entrance in, Drew nearer to me, sweetly questioning If I lack'd any thing. A guest, I answer'd, worthy to be here : Love said, You shall be he. I the unkinde, ungratefull ? Ah my deare, I cannot look on thee . Love took my hand, and smiling did reply, Who made the eyes but I ? Truth Lord, but I have marred them : let my shame Go where it doth deserve . And know you not, sayes Love, who bore the blame ? My deare, then I will serve. ' You must sit downe, sayes Love, and taste m y meat : So I did sit and eat . George Herbert REFERENCES Cabaud, J . ( 1 964) , Simone Wei/: A Fellowship in Love, Harvill, London ; Channel Press, N ew York, 1 965 . Originally published as L 'Hxperience Vecue de Simone Wei/ avec de nombreux inedits, Pion, Paris, 1 95 7 . Eliot, T . S . ( 1 952) , 'Preface' i n Simone Wei!, The Need for Roots: Pre­ lude to a Declaration of Duties towards Mankind, translated by A. F . 68 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY Wills, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London ; Putnam's Sons, New York, 1 95 3 . Petrement, S . ( 1977 ) , Simone Wei/: A Life, translated b y R . Rosenthal, Mowbrays, London and Oxford ( English translation Random House, I nc . , New York, 1 976) . Originally Simone Wei!, Fayard, Paris, 1 973 . published as La Vie de Price, H . ( 1 978), 'Translator's Preface' in Simone Weil, Lectures on Philosophy , translated by H . Price, Cambridge U niversity Press, Cambridge, 1978 . Originally published as Let;ons de philosophie , Pion , Paris, 1 959. Rees, R . ( 1 962), ' I ntroduction' in Simone Wei/: Selected Rssays 1 934- 43 , translated by R. Rees, Oxford University Press, London, 1 962. - ( 1 966) , Simone Wei!: A Sketch for a Portrait , Oxford University Press, London, 1966. Reynaud-Guerithault, A. ( 1 978), 'Introduction' in Simone Weil, Lectures on Philosophy , translated by H . Price, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1 978. Originally published as Let;ons de philosophie , Pion, Paris, 1 959. Weil , S . ( 1 945 ) , 'The Iliad or the Poem of Force', translated by Mary McCarthy, in Politics , New York, November 1 945 . Originally pub­ lished as 'L'Iliade ou le poe me de Ia force' [signed Emile N ovis] , Cahiers du Sud, X I X , 230, December 1940-January 194 1 . - ( 1 950), La Connaissance sumaturelle , Gallimard, Paris, 1 950. - ( 1 95 1 a ) , La Condition ouvn"ere, Gallimard, Paris, 1 95 1 . - ( 1 95 1 b ) , Waiting on God, translated by Emma Craufurd, Routledge and Kegan Paul. Originally published as L 'Attente de Dieu, La Colombe, Paris, 1 950. - ( 1 952a ) , Gravity and Grace, translated by Emma Craufurd, Rout­ ledge and Kegan Paul, London. Originally published as La Pesanteur et Ia Grace, Pion, Paris, 1 947. - ( 1 952b ) , The Need for Roots: Prelude to a Declaration of Duties towards Mankind, translated by A. F. Wills, Routledge and Kegan Pau l : Putnam's Sons, New York, 1 95 3 . Originally published as L 'Rnracinement: Prelude a une declaration des devoirs envers l'etre humain , Gallimard, Paris, 1 949. - ( 1 956) , The Notebooks of Simone Wei!, translated by A. F . Wills, 2 vols, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London : Putnam's Sons, New York, 1 956. Originally published as Cahiers I, Pion, Paris, 1 953 ; Cahiers II, Pion, Paris, 1 956. - ( 1 962) , ' H uman Personality' in Selected Rssays 1 934-43 by Simone Wei/, chosen and translated by R. Rees, Oxford U niversity Press, London. Originally published as ' La Personne et le sacre' in Ecrits de Londres et denzieres lettres , Gallimard, Paris, 1957. - ( 1 965 ) , Simone Wei!: Seventy Letters , translated and arranged by R. Rees, Oxford U niversity Press, London. HUMA N P E RS O N A L I TY This essay, one of Simone Wei/'s most powerful and beauti­ ful, was wn"tten dun"ng the last year of her brief life, in the late winter and early spn"ng of 1942-3. The title on the manuscnpt reads 'Collectivity. Person. Impersonal. Right. Justice. ' She had recently am·ved in England from New York where she had finally left her parents after their flight from Vichy France. As the following letter shows, she had no idea how her work would be received by her supen.ors in the Free French organization. Nevertheless Englan d enchanted her and she wn.tes reassuringly: 'Darlings, I received the letter addressed to Mme R's. I am so glad you say you are happy, although I daren 't believe it . . . . The spring is here, and there are trees ofpink blossom in the London squares. London is full of delicious little squares. But I don 't see much of London because work absorbs me. Not that I'm overworking at all. I am automatically stopped from time to time by fatigue, which forces me to rest until my energy revives; but I don't go out much at those times either. You say you are certain that my work is successful; but the truth is, I haven 't the slightest idea if what I am doing is likely to be effective. That depends upon far too many unknown factors. But I cannot go into details. My companions are as nice as 70 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY possible. You can tell A. that some of the things I was told when I was with you about the groups here were completely untrue . . . . ' Nevertheless reaction from her Free French colleagues to this work, as to much else she wrote at the time, was im­ patient. They wanted her to write on 'something concrete, like trade-union problems '. She was in fact doing precisely that, though her approach was radically different from what they had expected. 'You do not interest me. 1 1 No man can say these words to another without committing a cruelty and offending against justice . 'Your person2 does not interest me. ' These words can be used in an affectionate conversation between close friends, without jarring upon even the tenderest nerve of their friendship . I n the same way, one can say without degrading oneself, 'My person does not count', but not 'I do not count' . This proves that something i s amiss with the vocabulary of the modern trend of thought known as Personalism. And in this domain, where there is a grave error of vocabulary it is almost certainly the sign of a grave error of thought. There is something sacred in every man, but it is not his person . Nor yet is it the human personality. It is this man ; no more and no less. I see a passer-by in the street. He has long arms, blue eyes, and a mind whose thoughts I do not know, but per­ haps they are commonplace. It is neither his person, nor the human personality in him, which is sacred to me. It is he . The whole of him . The in La Table Ronde (December 1950) with the title 'La Personnalite humaine, le juste et l'inj uste' and in Ecrits de Londres with the title 'La Personne et le sacre' [R. Rees) . 2 The implications of the French personr�e cannot be conveyed completely by a single word in English. What Simone Wei! meant by 'person' in this context will become clearer as the essay proceeds, as also will the pejorative sense in which she uses the word 'personality'. 1 This essay appeared HUMAN PERSONALITY 71 arms, the eyes, the thoughts, everything. Not without in­ finite scruple would I touch anything of this. If it were the human personality in him that was sacred to me, I could easily put out his eyes . As a blind man he would be exactly as much a human personality as before. I should not have touched the person in him at all. I should have destroyed nothing but his eyes. It is impossible to define what is meant by respect for human personality. It is not just that it cannot be defined in words. That can be said of many perfectly clear ideas . But this one cannot be conceived either ; it cannot be defined nor isolated by the silent operation of the mind . To set up as a standard of public morality a notion which can neither be defined nor conceived is to open the door to every kind of tyranny. The notion of rights, which was launched into the world in 1 789, has proved unable, because of its intrinsic inade­ quacy, to fulfil the role assigned to it. To combine two inadequate notions, by talking about the rights of human personality, will not bring us any further. What is it, exactly, that prevents me from putting that man's eyes out if I am allowed to do so and if it takes my fancy ? Although it is the whole of him that is sacred to me, he is not sacred in all respects and from every point of view . H e i s not sacred i n as much as h e happens to have long arms, blue eyes, or possibly commonplace thoughts. Nor as a duke, if he is one ; nor as a dustman , if that is what he is. Nothing of all this would stay my hand. What would stay it is the knowledge that if someone were to put out his eyes, his soul would be lacerated by the thought that harm was being done to him. At the bottom of the heart of every human being, from earliest infancy until the tomb , there is something that goes on indomitably expecting, in the teeth of all experience of crimes committed, suffered, and witnessed, that good and not evil will be done to him. It is this above all that is sacred in every human being. 72 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY The good is the only source of the sacred . There is nothing sacred except the good and what pertains to it. This profound and childlike and unchanging expectation of good in the heart is not what is involved when we agitate for our rights. The motive which prompts a little boy to watch jealously to see if his brother has a slightly larger piece of cake arises from a much more superficial level of the soul. The word justice means two very different things according to whether it refers to the one or the other level . It is only the former one that matters. Every time that there arises from the depths of a human heart the childish cry which Christ himself could not re­ strain, 'Why am I being hurt ? ' , then there is certainly injustice . For if, as often happens, it is only the result of a misunderstanding, then the injustice consists in the inade­ quacy of the explanation . Those people who inflict the blows which provoke this cry are prompted by different motives according to temperament or occasion . There are some people who get a positive pleasure from the cry ; and many others simply do not hear it. For it is a silent cry, which sounds only in the secret heart. These two states of mind are closer than they appear to be. The second is only a weaker mode of the first ; its deafness is complacently cultivated because it is agreeable and it offers a positive satisfaction of its own. There are no other restraints upon our will than material necessity and the existence of other human beings around us. Any im­ aginary extension of these limits is seductive, so there is a seduction in whatever helps us to forget the reality of the obstacles. That is why upheavals like war and civil war are so intoxicating ; they empty human lives of their reality and seem to turn people into puppets. That is also why slavery is so pleasant to the masters. I n those who have suffered too many blows, in slaves for example, that place in the heart from which the infliction of evil evokes a cry of surprise may seem to be dead . But it is never quite dead ; it is simply unable to cry out any more. It has sunk into a state of dumb and ceaseless lamentation. HUMAN PERSONAL/1Y 73 And even in those who still have the power to cry out, the cry hardly ever expresses itself, eithet inwardly or out­ wardly, in coherent language . Usually, the words through which it seeks expression are quite irrelevant. That is all the more inevitable because those who most often have occasion to feel that evil is being done to them are those who are least trained in the art of speech. No­ thing, for example, is more frightful than to see some poor wretch in the police court stammering before a magistrate who keeps up an elegant flow of witticisms. Apart from the intelligence, the only human faculty which has an interest in public freedom of expression is that point in the heart which cries out against evil. But as it cannot express itself, freedom is of little use to it. What is first needed is a system of public education capable of providing it, so far as possible, with means of expression ; and next , a regime in which the public freedom of expres­ sion is characterized not so much by freedom as by an attentive silence in which this faint and inept cry can make itself heard ; and finally, institutions are needed of a sort which will, so far as possible, put power into the hands of men who are able and anxious to hear and understand it . Clearly, a political party busily seeking, or maintaining itself in power can discern nothing in these cries except a noise . Its reaction will be different according to whether the noise interferes with or contributes to that of its own propaganda. But it can never be capable of the tender and sensitive attention which is needed to understand its meanmg. The same is true to a lesser degree of organizations con­ taminated by party influences ; in other words, when public life is dominated by a party system, it is true of all organ­ izations, including, for example, trade unions and even churches. Naturally, too, parties and similar organizations are equally insensitive to intellectual scruples. So when freedom of expression means in fact no more than freedom of propaganda for organizations of this kind, 74 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY there is in fact no free expression for the only parts of the human soul that deserve it. Or if there is any, it is infinitesi­ mal ; hardly more than in a totalitarian system. And this is how it is in a democracy where the party system controls the distribution of power ; which is what we call democracy in France, for up to now we have known no other. We must therefore invent something different . Applying the same criterion in the same way to any public institution we can reach equally obvious conclusions. It is not the person which provides this criterion. When the infliction of evil provokes a cry of sorrowful surprise from the depth of the soul , it is not a personal thing. Injury to the personality and its desires is not sufficient to evoke it, but only and always the sense of contact with injustice through pain. It is always, in the last of men as in Christ himself, an impersonal protest. There are also many cries of personal protest, but they are unimportant ; you may provoke as many of them as you wish without violating anything sacred . * So far from its being his person, what is sacred in a human being is the impersonal in him. Everything which is impersonal in man is sacred, and nothing else . In our days, when writers and scientists have so oddly usurped the place of priests, the public acknowledges, with a totally unjustified docility, that the artistic and scien­ tific faculties are sacred . This is generally held to be self­ evident, though it is very far from being so. If any reason is felt to be called for, people allege that the free play of these faculties is one of the highest manifestations of the human personality . Often it is, indeed, no more than that. In which case it is easy to see how much it is worth and what can be expected from it. One of its results is the sort of attitude which is summed up in Blake's horrible saying : 'Sooner murder an infant in HUMAN PERSONAL/1Y 75 its cradle than nurse unacted desires', 1 or the attitude which breeds the idea of the 'gratuitous act'. Another result is a science in which every possible standard, criterion , and value is recognized except truth . Gregorian chant, Romanesque architecture, the Iliad, the invention of geometry were not, for the people through whom they were brought into being and made available to us, occasions for the manifestation of personality. When science, art, literature, and philosophy are simply the manifestation of personality they are on a level where glorious and dazzling achievements are possible, which can make a man's name live for thousands of years. But above this level, far above, separated by an abyss, is the level where the highest things are achieved. These things are essentially anonymous. It is pure chance whether the names of those who reach this level are preserved or lost ; even when they are remem­ bered they have become anonymous. Their personality has vanished. Truth and beauty dwell on this level of the impersonal and the anonymous. This is the realm of the sacred ; on the other level nothing is sacred , except in the sense that we might say this of a touch of colour in a picture if it repre­ sented the Eucharist. What is sacred in science is truth ; what is sacred in art is beauty . Truth and beauty are impersonal. All this is too obvious. If a child is doing a sum and does it wrong, the mistake bears the stamp of his personality. If he does the sum exactly right, his personality does not enter into it at all . Perfection is impersonal. Our personality is the part of us which belongs to error and sin. The whole effort of the mystic has always been to become such that there is no part left in his soul to say ' I ' . 1 h seems possible that Simone Wei! took Blake t o mean : If you desire t o murder an iufant you should do so, instead of : If you stifle your desires, you are doing something similar to murdering an infant. But her point does not depend upon this illustration [R. Rees] . 76 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY But the part of the soul which says 'We' is infinitely more dangerous still. * Impersonality is only reached by the practice of a form of attention which is rare in itself and impossible except in solitude ; and not only physical but mental solitude. This is never achieved by a man who thinks of himself as a member of a collectivity, as part of something which says 'We'. Men as parts of a collectivity are debarred from even the lower forms of the impersonal. A group of human beings cannot even add two and two. Working out a sum takes place in a mind temporarily oblivious of the existence of any other minds. Although the personal and the impersonal are opposed, there is a way from the one to the other. But there is no way from the collective to the impersonal. A collectivity must dissolve into separate persons before the impersonal can be reached . This is the only sense in which the person has more of the sacred than the collectivity. The collectivity is not only alien to the sacred , but it deludes us with a false imitation of it. I dolatry is the name of the error which attributes a sacred character to the collectivity ; and it is the commonest of crimes, at all times, at all places. The man for whom the development of personality is all that counts has totally lost all sense of the sacred ; and it is hard to know which of these errors is the worst . They are often found combined, in various proportions, in the same mind. But the second error is much less powerful and enduring than the first . Spiritually, the struggle between Germany and France in 1 940 was in the main not a struggle between barbarism and civilization or between evil and good, but between the first of these two errors and the second. The victory of the former is not surprising ; it is by nature the stronger. There is nothing scandalous in the subordination of the person to the collectivity ; it is a mechanical fact of the same l!Wvli\N PHRSONAL/'11 ' 77 order as the inferiority of a gram to a kilogram on the scales. The person is in fact always subordinate to the collectivity, even in its so-called free expression. For example, it is precisely those artists and writers who are most inclined to think of their art as the manifestation of their personality who are in fact the most in bondage to public taste . Hugo had no difficulty in reconciling the cult of the self with his role of 'resounding echo' ; and examples like Wilde , Gide, and the Surrealists are even more ob­ vious. Scientists of the same class are equally enslaved by fashion, which rules over science even more despotically than over the shape of hats. For these men the collective opinion of specialists is practically a dictatorship. The person, being subordinate to the collective both in fact and by the nature of things, enjoys no natural rights which can be appealed to on its behalf. It is said, quite correctly, that in antiquity there existed no notion of respect for the person. The ancients thought far too clearly to entertain such a confused idea. The human being can only escape from the collective by raising himself above the personal and entering into the impersonal. The moment he does this, there is something in him, a small portion of his soul , upon which nothing of the collective can get a hold . If he can root himself in the impersonal good so as to be able to draw energy from it, then he is in a condition , whenever he feels the obligation to do so, to bring to bear without any outside help, against any collectivity, a small but real force. There are occasions when an almost infinitesimal force can be decisive. A collectivity is much stronger than a single man ; but every collectivity depends for its existence upon opera­ tions, of which simple addition is the elementary example, which can only be performed by a mind in a state of solitude. This dependence suggests a method of giving the imper­ sonal a hold on the collective, if only we could find out how to use it. Every man who has once touched the level of the im­ personal is charged with a responsibility towards all human 78 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY beings ; to safeguard, not their persons, but whatever frail potentialities are hidden within them for passing over to the impersonal. It is primarily to these men that the appeal to respect the sacredness of the human being should be addressed . For such an appeal can have no reality unless it is addressed to someone capable of understanding it. It is useless to explain to a collectivity that there is some­ thing in each of the units composing it which it ought not to violate. To begin with, a collectivity is not someone, except by a fiction ; it has only an abstract existence and can only be spoken to fictitiously. And, moreover, if it were someone it would be someone who was not disposed to respect any­ thing except himself. Further, the chief danger does not lie in the collectivity's tendency to circumscribe the person, but in the person's tendency to immolate himself in the collective. Or perhaps the first danger is only a superficial and deceptive aspect of the second. Just as it is useless to tell the collectivity that the person is sacred, it is also useless to tell the person so. The person can­ not believe it. It does not feel sacred . The reason that pre­ vents the person from feeling sacred is that actually it is not. If there are some people who feel differently, who feel something sacred in their own persons and believe they can generalize and attribute it to every person, they are under a double illusion. What they feel is not the authentic sense of the sacred but its false imitation engendered by the collective ; and if they feel it in respect of their own person it is because it partici­ pates in collective prestige through the social consideration bestowed upon it. So they are mistaken in thinking they can generalize from their own case. Their motive is generous, but it cannot have enough force to make them really see the mass of people as anything but mere anonymous human matter. But it is hard for them to find this out, because they have no contact with the mass of people. HUMAN PERSONALITY 79 The person in man is a thing in distress ; it feels cold and is always looking for a warm shelter. B ut those in whom it is, in fact or in expectation, warmly wrapped in social consideration are unaware of this. That is why it was not in popular circles that the philos­ ophy of personalism originated and developed , but among writers, for whom it is part of their profession to have or hope to acquire a name and a reputation. Relations between the collectivity and the person should be arranged with the sole purpose of removing whatever is detrimental to the growth and mysterious germination of the impersonal element in the soul . This means, on the one hand, that for every person there should be enough room, enough freedom to plan the use of one's time, the opportunity to reach ever higher levels of attention, some solitude, some silence . At the same time the person needs warmth, lest it be driven by distress to sub­ merge itself in the collective. * If this is the good, then modern societies, even democratic ones, seem to go about as far as it is possible to go in the direction of evil . In particular, a modern factory reaches perhaps almost the limit of horror. Everybody in it is con­ stantly harassed and kept on edge by the interference of extraneous wills while the soul is left in cold and desolate misery. What man needs is silence and warmth ; what he is given is an icy pandemonium. Physical labour may be painful, but it is not degrading as such. It is not art ; it is not science ; it is something else, possessing an exactly equal value with art and science, for it provides an equal opportunity to reach the impersonal stage of attention. To take a youth who has a vocation for this kind of work and employ him at a conveyor-belt or as a piece-work machinist is no less a crime than to put out the eyes of the young Watteau and make him turn a grindstone. But the painter's vocation can be discerned and the other cannot. 80 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY Exactly to the same extent as art and science, though in a different way, physical labour is a certain contact with the reality, the truth, and the beauty of this universe and with the eternal wisdom which is the order in it. For this reason it is sacrilege to degrade labour in exactly the same sense that it is sacrilege to trample upon the Eucharist. If the workers felt this, if they felt that by being the victim they are in a certain sense the accomplice of sacrilege, their resistance would have a very different force from what is provided by the consideration of personal rights. It would not be an economic demand but an impulse from the depth of their being, fierce and desperate like that of a young girl who is being forced into a brothel ; and at the same time it would be a cry of hope from the depth of their heart. This feeling, which surely enough exists in them, is so inarticulate as to be indiscernible even to themselves ; and it is not the professionals of speech who can express it for them . Usually, when addressing them on their conditions, the selected topic is wages ; and for men burdened with a fatigue that makes any effort of attention painful it is a relief to contemplate the unproblematic clarity of figures. In this way, they forget that the subject of the bargain, which they complain they are being forced to sell cheap and for less than the just price, is nothing other than their soul . Suppose the devil were bargaining for the soul of some poor wretch and someone, moved by pity, should step in and say to the devil : 'It is a shame for you to bid so low ; the commodity is worth at least twice as much . ' Such i s the sinister farce which has been played b y the working-class movement, its trade unions, its political parties, its leftist intellectuals. This bargaining spirit was already implicit in the notion of rights which the men of 1789 so unwisely made the keynote of their deliberate challenge to the world. By so doing, they ensured its inefficacy in advance. * HUMAN PERSONAL/1Y 81 The notion of rights i s linked with the notion of sharing out, of exchange, of measured quantity. It has a commercial flavour, essentially evocative of legal claims and arguments . Rights are always asserted in a tone of contention ; and when this tone is adopted, it must rely upon force in the background, or else it will be laughed at. There is a number of other notions, all in the same category, which are themselves entirely alien to the super­ natural but nevertheless a little superior to brute force. All of them relate to the behaviour of the collective animal , to use Plato's language, while it still exhibits a few traces of the training imposed on it by the supernatural working of grace. If they are not continually revived by a renewal of this working, if they are merely survivals of it, they become necessarily subject to the animal's caprice . To this category belong the notion of rights, and of personality, and of democracy. As Bernanos had the cour­ age to point out, democracy offers no defence against dic­ tatorship . By the nature of things, the person is subdued to the collectivity, and rights are dependent upon force. The lies and misconceptions which obscure this truth are ex­ tremely dangerous because they prevent us from appealing to the only thing which is immune to force and can preserve us from it : namely, that other force which is the radiance of the spirit. It is only in plants, by virtue of the sun's energy caught up by the green leaves and operating in the sap , that inert matter can find its way upward against the law of gravity. A plant deprived of light is gradually but inexor­ ably overcome by gravity and death . Among the lies in question is the eighteenth-century materialists' notion of natural right. We do not owe this to Rousseau , whose lucid and powerful spirit was of genuinely Christian inspiration, but to Diderot and the Encyclopedistes. It was from Rome that we inherited the notion of rights, and like everything else that comes from ancient Rome, who is the woman full of the names of blasphemy in the Apocalypse, it is pagan and unbaptizable. The Romans, like Hitler, understood that power is not fully efficacious 82 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY unless clothed in a few ideas, and to this end they made use of the idea of rights, which is admirably suited to it. Mod­ ern Germany has been accused of flouting the idea ; but she invoked it ad nauseam in her role of deprived, proletarian nation. It is true, of course, that she allows only one right to her victims : obedience. Ancient Rome did the same. It is singularly monstrous that ancient Rome should be praised for having bequeathed to us the notion of rights. If we examine Roman law in its cradle, to see what species it belongs to, we discover that property was defined by the jus utendi et abutendi. And in fact the things which the prop­ erty owner had the right to use or abuse at will were for the most part human beings. The Greeks had no conception of rights. They had no words to express it. They were content with the name of justice. It is extraordinary that Antigone's unwritten law should have been confused with the idea of natural right. In Creon's eyes there was absolutely nothing that was natural in Antigone's behaviour. He thought she was mad. And we should be the last people to disagree with him ; we who at this moment are thinking, talking, and behaving exactly as he did. One has only to consult the text. Antigone says to Creon : 'It was not Zeus who published that edict ; it was not Justice, companion of the gods in the other world, who set such laws among men . ' 1 Creon tries to convince her that his orders were just ; he accuses her of having outraged one of her brothers by honouring the other, so that the same honour has been paid to the impious and the loyal , to the one who died in the attempt to destroy his own country and the one who died defending it. She answers : 'Nevertheless the other world demands equal laws . ' To which he sensibly objects : 'There can be no equal sharing between a brave man and a traitor', and she has only the absurd reply : 'Who knows whether this holds in the other world?' 1 W e have translated the author's own versions o f the Greek [R . Rees) . HUMAN PERSONALIIY 83 Creon's comment is perfectly reasonable : 'A foe is never a friend, not even in death . ' And the little simpleton can only reply : 'I was born to share, not hate , but love . ' T o which Creon, ever more reasonable : 'Pass, then, to the other world, and if thou must love, love those who dwell there . ' And , truly, this was the right place for her. For the unwritten law which this little girl obeyed had nothing whatsoever in common with rights, or with the natural ; it was the same love, extreme and absurd, which led Christ to the Cross . I t was Justice, companion of the gods in the other world, who dictated this surfeit of love, and not any right at all . Rights have no direct connection with love. Just as the notion of rights is alien to the Greek mind, so also it is alien to the Christian inspiration whenever it is pure and uncontaminated by the Roman, Hebraic, or Aristotelian heritage. One cannot imagine St Francis of Assisi talking about rights. If you say to someone who has ears to hear : 'What you are doing to me is not just' , you may touch and awaken at its source the spirit of attention and love. But it is not the same with words like ' I have the right . . . ' or 'you have no right to . . . . ' They evoke a latent war and awaken the spirit of contention. To place the notion of rights at the centre of social conflicts is to inhibit any possible impulse of charity on both sides. Relying almost exclusively on this notion, it becomes impossible to keep one's eyes on the real problem. If some­ one tries to browbeat a farmer to sell his eggs at a moderate price, the farmer can say : 'I have the right to keep my eggs if I don't get a good enough price . ' But if a young girl is being forced into a brothel she will not talk about her rights. In such a situation the word would sound ludicrously inadequate . Thus it is that the social drama, which corresponds to the latter situation, is falsely assimilated, by the use of the word 'rights' , to the former one. 84 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY Thanks to this word, what should have been a cry of protest from the depth of the heart has been turned into a shrill nagging of claims and counter-claims, which is both impure and unpractical . * The notion of rights, by its very mediocrity, leads on natur­ ally to that of the person, for rights are related to personal things. They are on that level. It is much worse still if the word 'personal' is added to the word 'rights', thus implying the rights of the personality to what is called full expression. In that case the tone that colours the cry of the oppressed would be even meaner than bargaining. It would be the tone of envy. For the full expression of personality depends upon its being inflated by social prestige ; it is a social privilege. No one mentions this to the masses when haranguing them about personal rights. They are told the opposite ; and their minds h ave not enough analytic power to perceive this truth clearly for themselves. But they feel it ; their everyday ex­ perience makes them certain of it. However, this is not a reason for them to reject the slogan. To the dimmed understanding of our age there seems nothing odd in claiming an equal share of privilege for everybody - an equal share in things whose essence is privilege. The claim is both absurd and base ; absurd be­ cause privilege is, by definition, inequality ; and base because it is not worth claiming. But the category of men who formulate claims, and every­ thing else, the men who have the monopoly of language, is a category of privileged people. They are not the ones to say that privilege is unworthy to be desired. They don't think so and, in any case, it would be indecent for them to say it. Many indispensable truths, which could save men, go unspoken for reasons of this kind ; those who could utter them cannot formulate them and those who could formulate them cannot utter them. If politics were taken seriously, finding a remedy for this would be one of its more urgent problems. HUMAN PERSONALITY 85 In an unstable society the privileged have a bad conscience. Some of them hide it behind a defiant air and say to the masses : 'It is quite appropriate that I should possess privi­ leges which you are denied . ' Others benevolently profess : 'I claim for all of you an equal share in the privileges I enjoy. ' The first attitude is odious . The second is silly, and also too easy. Both of them equally encourage the people down the road of evil , away from their true and unique good, which they do not possess, but to which , in a sense, they are so close. They are far closer than those who bestow pity on them to an authentic good, which could be a source of beauty and truth and joy and fulfilment. But since they have not reached it and do not know how to, this good might as well be infinitely far away. Those who speak for the people and to them are incapable of understanding either their distress or what an overflowing good is almost within their reach . And , for the people, it is indispensable to be understood . Affliction is by its nature inarticulate. The afflicted silently beseech to be given the words to express themselves. There are times when they are given none ; but there are also times when they are given words, but ill-chosen ones, because those who choose them know nothing of the affliction they would interpret. Usually, they are far removed from it by the circumstances of their life ; but even if they are in close contact with it or have recently experienced it themselves, they are still remote from it because they put it at a distance at the first possible moment. Thought revolts from contemplating affliction, to the same degree that living flesh recoils from death. A stag advancing voluntarily step by step to offer itself to the teeth of a pack of hounds is about as probable as an act of attention directed towards a real affliction , which is close at hand, on the part of a mind which is free to avoid it. But that which is indispensable to the good and is impos­ sible naturally is always possible supernaturally. * 86 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY Supernatural good is not a sort of supplement to natural good , as we are told, with support from Aristotle , for our greater comfort. It would be nice if this were true, but it is not. In all the crucial problems of human existence the only choice is between supernatural good on the one hand and evil on the other. To put into the mouth of the afflicted words from the vocabulary of middle values, such as democracy, rights, personality, is to offer them something which can bring them no good and will inevitably do them much harm. These notions do not dwell in heaven ; they hang in the middle air, and for this very reason they cannot root them­ selves in earth . It is the light falling continually from heaven which alone gives a tree the energy to send powerful roots deep into the earth. The tree is really rooted in the sky. It is only what comes from heaven that can make a real impress on the earth . In order to provide an armour for the afflicted, one must put into their mouths only those words whose rightful abode is in heaven, beyond heaven, in the other world. There is no fear of its being impossible. Affliction disposes the soul to welcome and avidly drink in everything which comes from there. For these products it is not consumers but producers who are in short supply. The test for suitable words is easily recognized and applied. The afflicted are overwhelmed with evil and starving for good. The only words suitable for them are those which express nothing but good, in its pure state. It is easy to discriminate. Words which can be associated with something signifying an evil are alien to pure good . We are criticizing a man when we say : 'He puts his person forward ; therefore the person is alien to good . We can speak of an abuse of democracy ; therefore democracy is alien to good. To possess a right implies the possibility of making good or bad use of it ; therefore rights are alien to good. On the other hand, it is always and everywhere good to fulfil an obligation . Truth, beauty, justice, compassion are always and everywhere good. HUMAN PERSONALITY 87 For the aspirations of the afflicted , if we wish to be sure of using the right words, all that is necessary is to confine ourselves to those words and phrases which always, every­ where, in all circumstances express only the good. This is one of the only two services which can be ren­ dered to the afflicted with words. The other is to find the words which express the truth of their affliction , the words which can give resonance, through the crust of external circumstances, to the cry which is always inaudible : 'Why am I being hurt ? ' For this, they cannot count upon men o f talent, person­ ality, celebrity, or even genius in the sense in which the word is usually employed, which assimilates it to talent. They can count only upon men of the very highest genius : the poet of the Iliad, Aeschylus, Sophocles, Shakespeare as he was when he wrote Lear, or Racine when he wrote Phedre . There are not very many of them . But there are many human beings only poorly or moder­ ately endowed by nature, who seem infinitely inferior not merely to Homer, Aeschylus, Sophocles, Shakespeare, and Racine but also to Virgil, Corneille, and Hugo, but who nevertheless inhabit the realm of impersonal good where the latter poets never set foot. A village idiot in the literal sense of the word , if he really loves truth, is infinitely superior to Aristotle in his thought, even though he never utters anything but inarticulate murmurs . He is infinitely closer to Plato than Aristotle ever was. He has genius, while only the word talent applies to Aristotle . If a fairy offered to change his destiny for one resembling Aristotle's he would be wise to refuse unhesi­ tatingly. But he does not know this. And nobody tells him. Everybody tells him the contrary . But he must be told. I diots, men without talent, men whose talent is average or only a little more, must be encouraged if they possess genius . We need not be afraid of making them proud , because love of truth is always accompanied by humility. Real genius is nothing else but the supernatural virtue of humility in the domain of thought . 88 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY What is needed is to cherish the growth of genius, with a warm and tender respect, and not, as the men of 1789 proposed, to encourage the flowering of talents. For it is qnly heroes of real purity, the saints and geniuses, who can help the afflicted. But the help is obstructed by a screen which is formed between the two by the men of talent, intelligence, energy, character, or strong personality. The screen must not be damaged, but put aside as gently and imperceptibly as possible . The far more dangerous screen of the collective must be broken by abolishing every part of our institutions and customs which harbours the party spirit in any form whatsoever. Neither a personality nor a party is ever responsive either to truth or to affliction . * There is a natural alliance between truth and affliction, because both of them are mute suppliants, eternally con­ demned to stand speechless in our presence . Just as a vagrant accused of stealing a carrot from a field stands before a comfortably seated judge who keeps up an elegant flow of queries, comments and witticisms while the accused is unable to stammer a word , so truth stands before an intelligence which is concerned with the elegant man­ ipulation of opinions. It is always language that formulates opinions, even when there are no words spoken . The natural faculty called intel­ ligence is concerned with opinion and language. Language expresses relations ; but it expresses only a few, because its operation needs time. When it is confused and vague, with­ out precision or order, when the speaker or listener is deficient in the power of holding a thought in his mind, then language is empty or almost empty of any real rela­ tional content. When it is perfectly clear, precise, rigorous, ordered, when it is addressed to a mind which is capable of keeping a thought present while it adds another to it and of keeping them both present while it adds a third, and so on , then in such a case language can hold a fairly rich content of relations. But like all wealth, this relative wealth is HUMAN PERSONAL/1Y 89 abject poverty compared with the perfection which alone is desirable . At the very best, a mind enclosed in language is in prison. It is limited to the number of relations which words can make simultaneously present to it ; and remains in ignor­ ance of thoughts which involve the combination of a greater number. These thoughts are outside language, they are unformulable, although they are perfectly rigorous and clear and although every one of the relations they involve is capable of precise expression in words . So the mind moves in a closed space of partial truth , which may be larger or smaller, without ever being able so much as to glance at what is outside. If a captive mind is unaware of being in prison, it is living in error. If it has recognized the fact, even for the tenth of a second , and then quickly forgotten it in order to avoid suffering, it is living in falsehood. Men of the most brilliant intelligence can be born , live, and die in error and false­ hood . In them, intelligence is neither a good, nor even an asset. The difference between more or less intelligent men is like the difference between criminals condemned to life imprisonment in smaller or larger cells. The intelligent man who is proud of his intelligence is like a condemned man who is proud of his large cell . A man whose mind feels that it is captive would prefer to blind himself to the fact. But if he hates falsehood, he will not do so ; and in that case he will have to suffer a lot. He will beat his head against the wall until he faints. He will come to again and look with terror at the wall, until one day he begins afresh to beat his head against it ; and once again he will faint. And so on endlessly and without hope . One day he will wake up on the other side of the wall. Perhaps he is still in a prison , although a larger one . No matter. He has found the key ; he knows the secret which breaks down every wall. He has passed beyond what men call intelligence, into the beginning of wisdom. The mind which is enclosed within language can possess only opinions. The mind which has learned to grasp thoughts 90 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY which are inexpressible because of the number of relations they combine, although they are more rigorous and clearer than anything that can be expressed in the most precise language, such a mind has reached the point where it al­ ready dwells in truth . It possesses certainty and unclouded faith. And it matters little whether its original intelligence was great or small , whether its prison cell was narrow or wide. All that matters is that it has come to the end of its intelligence, such as it was, and has passed beyond it. A village idiot is as close to truth as a child prodigy . The one and the other are separated from it only by a wall. But the only way into truth is through one's own annihilation ; through dwelling a long time in a state of extreme and total humiliation. It is the same barrier which keeps us from understanding affliction. Just as truth is a different thing from opinion , so affliction is a different thing from suffering. Affliction is a device for pulverizing the soul ; the man who falls into it is like a workman who gets caught up in a machine. He is no longer a man but a torn and bloody rag on the teeth of a cog­ wheel. The degree and type of suffering which constitutes afflic­ tion in the strict sense of the word varies greatly with different people. It depends chiefly upon the amount of vitality they start with and upon their attitude towards suffering. Human thought is unable to acknowledge the reality of affliction. To acknowledge the reality of affliction means saying to oneself : 'I may lose at any moment, through the play of circumstances over which I have no control, any­ thing whatsoever that I possess, including those things which are so intimately mine that I consider them as being myself. There is nothing that I might not lose. It could happen at any moment that what I am might be abolished and replaced by anything whatsoever of the filthiest and most contemptible sort. ' To b e aware of this i n the depth of one's soul is to experience non-being. It is the state of extreme and total HUMAN PERSONALI1Y 91 humiliation which i s also the condition for passing over into truth . It is a death of the soul . This is why the naked spectacle of affliction makes the soul shudder as the flesh shudders at the proximity of death . We think piously of the dead when we evoke them in memory, or when we walk among graves, or when we see them decently laid out on a bed . But the sight of corpses lying about as on a battlefield can sometimes be both sinis­ ter and grotesque . It arouses horror. At the stark sight of death , the flesh recoils. When affliction is seen vaguely from a distance, either physical or mental , so that it can be confused with simple suffering, it inspires in generous souls a tender feeling of pity. But if by chance it is suddenly revealed to them in all its nakedness as a corrosive force, a mutilation or leprosy of the soul, then people shiver and recoil . The afflicted them­ selves feel the same shock of horror at their own condition. To listen to someone is to put oneself in his place while he is speaking. To put oneself in the place of someone whose soul is corroded by affliction , or in near danger of it, is to annihilate oneself. It is more difficult than suicide would be for a happy child . Therefore the afflicted are not listened to . They are like someone whose tongue has been cut out and who occasionally forgets the fact. When they move their lips no ear perceives any sound . And they them­ selves soon sink into impotence in the use of language , because of the certainty of not being heard . That is why there is no hope for the vagrant as he stands before the magistrate . Even if, through his stammerings, he should utter a cry to pierce the soul, neither the magistrate nor the public will hear it. His cry is mute. And the afflicted are nearly always equally deaf to one another ; and each of them, constrained by the general indifference, strives by means of self-delusion or forgetfulness to become deaf to his own self. Only by the supernatural working of grace can a soul pass through its own annihilation to the place where alone it can get the sort of attention which can attend to truth and to 92 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY affliction. It is the same attention which listens to both of them. The name of this intense, pure, disinterested , gratu­ itous, generous attention is love. Because affliction and truth need the same kind of atten­ tion before they can be heard, the spirit of justice and the spirit of truth are one. The spirit of justice and truth is nothing else but a certain kind of attention, which is pure love. Thanks to an eternal and providential decree, everything produced by a man in every sphere, when he is ruled by the spirit of justice and truth, is endowed with the radiance of beauty. Beauty is the supreme mystery of this world . It is a gleam which attracts the attention and yet does nothing to sustain it. Beauty always promises, but never gives anything ; it stimulates hunger but has no nourishment for the part of the soul which looks in this world for sustenance. It feeds only the part of the soul that gazes. While exciting desire, it makes clear that there is nothing in it to be desired, because the one thing we want is that it should not change . If one does not seek means to evade the exquisite anguish it in­ flicts, then desire is gradually transformed into love ; and one begins to acquire the faculty of pure and disinterested attention. In proportion to the hideousness of affliction is the su­ preme beauty of its true representation . Even in recent times one can point to Phedre, L'Ecole des femmes, Lear, and the poems of Villon ; but far better examples are the plays of Aeschylus and Sophocles, and far better still, the Iliad, the book of Job and certain folk poems ; and far beyond these again are the accounts of the Passion in the Gospels. The radiance of beauty illumines affliction with the light of the spirit of justice and love, which is the only light by which human thought can confront affliction and report the truth of it. And it sometimes happens that a fragment of inexpress­ ible truth is reflected in words which, although they cannot hold the truth that inspired them, have nevertheless so HUMAN PERSONALITY 93 perfect a formal correspondence with it that every mind seeking that truth finds support in them. Whenever this happens a gleam of beauty illumines the words. Everything which originates from pure love is lit with the radiance of beauty. Beauty can be perceived , though very dimly and mixed with many false substitutes, within the cell where all human thought is at first imprisoned . And upon her rest all the hopes of truth and justice, with tongue cut out. She, too, has no language ; she does not speak ; she says nothing. But she has a voice to cry out . She cries out and points to truth and justice who are dumb, like a dog who barks to bring people to his master lying unconscious in the snow. Justice, truth, and beauty are sisters and comrades. With three such beautiful words we have no need to look for any others. * Justice consists in seeing that no harm is done to men . Whenever a man cries inwardly : 'Why am I being hurt ? ' harm i s being done t o him. He i s often mistaken when he tries to define the harm, and why and by whom it is being inflicted on him. But the cry itself is infallible. The other cry, which we hear so often : 'Why has some­ body else got more than I have ? ' , refers to rights. We must learn to distinguish between the two cries and to do all that is possible, as gently as possible, to hush the second one, with the help of a code of justice, regular tribunals, and the police . Minds capable of solving problems of this kind can be formed in a law school. But the cry 'Why am I being hurt ? ' raises quite different problems, for which the spirit of truth, justice, and love is indispensable. I n every soul the cry to be delivered from evil is incess­ ant. The Lord's Prayer addresses it to God. But God has power to deliver from evil only the eternal part of the soul of those who have made real and direct contact with him. The rest of the soul, and the entire soul of whoever has not 94 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY received the grace of real and direct contact with God, is at the mercy of men's caprice and the hazards of circumstance. Therefore it is for men to see that men are preserved from harm . When harm is done to a man, real evil enters into him ; not merely pain and suffering, but the actual horror of evil. Just as men have the power of transmitting good to one another, so they have the power to transmit evil. One may transmit evil to a human being by flattt!ring him or giving him comforts and pleasures ; but most often men transmit evil to other men by doing them harm. Nevertheless, eternal wisdom does not abandon the soul entirely to the mercy of chance and men's caprice . The harm inflicted on a man by a wound from outside sharpens his thirst for the good and thus there automatically arises the possibility of a cure. If the wound is deep, the thirst is for good in its purest form. The part of the soul which cries 'Why am I being hurt ?' is on the deepest level and even in the most corrupt of men it remains from earliest infancy perfectly intact and totally innocent . To maintain justice and preserve men from all harm means first of all to prevent harm being done to them . For those to whom harm has been done, it means to efface the material consequences by putting them in a place where the wound, if it is not too deep, may be cured naturally by a spell of well-being. But for those in whom the wound is a laceration of the soul it means further, and above all, to offer them good in its purest form to assuage their thirst. Sometimes it may be necessary to inflict harm in order to stimulate this thirst before assuaging it, and that is what punishment is for. Men who are so estranged from the good that they seek to spread evil everywhere can only be reinte­ grated with the good by having harm inflicted upon them. This must be done until the completely innocent part of their soul awakens with the surprised cry 'Why am I being hurt ? ' The innocent part of the criminal's soul must then be fed to make it grow until it becomes able to judge and condemn his past crimes and at last, by the help of grace, to HUMAN PERSONALITY 95 forgive them. With this the punishment is completed ; the criminal has been reintegrated with the good and should be publicly and solemnly reintegrated with society. That is what punishment is. Even capital punishment, although it excludes reintegration with society in the literal sense, should be the same thing. Punishment is solely a method of procuring pure good for men who do not desire it. The art of punishing is the art of awakening in a criminal, by pain or even death, the desire for pure good. * But we have lost all idea of what punishment is. We are not aware that its purpose is to procure good for a man. For us it stops short with the infliction of harm. That is why there is one, and only one, thing in modern society more hideous than crime - namely, repressive justice. To make the idea of repressive justice the main motive of war or revolt is inconceivably dangerous. It is necessary to use fear as a deterrent against the criminal activity of cowards ; but that repressive justice, as we ignorantly con­ ceive it today, should be made the motive of heroes is appalling. All talk of chastisement, punishment, retribution or punitive justice nowadays always refers solely to the basest kind of revenge . The treasure of suffering and violent death , which Christ chose for himself and which he so often offers to those he loves, means so little to us that we throw it to those whom we least esteem, knowing that they will make nothing of it and having no intention of helping them to discover its value. For criminals, true punishment ; for those whom afflic­ tion has bitten deep into the soul , such help as may bring them to quench their thirst at the supernatural springs ; for everyone else, some well-being, a great deal of beauty, and protection from those who would harm him ; in every sphere, a strict curb upon the chatter of lies, propaganda, and opinion, and the encouragement of a silence in which truth can germinate and grow ; this is what is due to men . 96 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY To ensure that they get it, we can only count upon those who have passed beyond a certain barrier, and it may be objected that they are too few in number. Probably there are not many of them, but they are no object for statistics, because most of them are hidden. Pure good from heaven only reaches the earth in imperceptible quantities, whether in the individual soul or in society. The grain of mustard seed is 'the least of all seeds' . Persephone ate only one grain of the pomegranate. A pearl buried deep in a field is not visible ; neither is the yeast in dough. But just as the catalysts or bacteria, such as yeast, operate by their mere presence in chemical reactions, so in human affairs the invisible seed of pure good is decisive when it is put in the right place. How is it to be put there ? Much could be done by those whose function it is to advise the public what to praise, what to admire, what to hope and strive and seek for. It would be a great advance if even a few of these makers of opinion were to resolve in their hearts to eschew absolutely and without exception everything that is not pure good, perfection, truth, justice, love. It would be an even greater advance if the majority of those who possess today some fragments of spiritual auth­ ority were aware of their obligation never to hold up for human aspiration anything but the real good in its perfect purity. * By the power of words we always mean their power of illusion and error. But, thanks to a providential arrange­ ment, there are certain words which possess, in themselves, when properly used, a virtue which illumines and lifts up towards the good . These are the words which refer to an absolute perfection which we cannot conceive. Since the proper use of these words involves not trying to make them fit any conception, it is in the words themselves, as words, that the power to enlighten and draw upward resides. What they express is beyond our conception . HUMAN PERSONALITY 97 God and tntth are such words ; also justice, love, and good. It is dangerous to use words of this kind . They are like an ordeal . To use them legitimately one must avoid referring them to anything humanly conceivable and at the same time one must associate with them ideas and actions which are derived solely and directly from the light which they shed . Otherwise; everyone quickly recognizes them for lies. They are uncomfortable companions. Words like nght, demoo-acy and person are more accommodating and are therefore naturally preferred by even the best intentioned of those who assume public functions. Public functions have no other meaning except the possibility of doing good to men, and those who assume them with good intentions do in fact want to procure good for their contemporaries ; but they usually make the mistake of thinking they can begin by getting it at bargain prices . Words of the middle region, such as nght, democracy, person, are valid in their own region , which is that of ordinary institutions. But for the sustaining inspiration of which all institutions are, as it were, the projection, a differ­ ent language is needed. The subordination of the person to the collectivity is in the nature of things, like the inferiority of a gram to a kilogram on the scales. But there can be a scales on which the gram outweighs the kilogram . It is only necessary for one arm to be more than a thousand times as long as the other. The law of equilibrium easily overcomes an inequal­ ity of weight. But the lesser will never outweigh the greater unless the relation between them is regulated by the law of equilibrium. I n the same way, there is no guarantee for democracy, or for the protection of the person against the collectivity, without a disposition of public life relating it to the higher good which is impersonal and unrelated to any political form . It is true that the word person is often applied to God . But in the passage where Christ offers God himself as an 98 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY example to men of the perfection which they are told to achieve, he uses not only the image of a person but also, above all, that of an impersonal order : 'That ye may be like the children of your Father which is in heaven ; for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good , and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust . ' Justice, truth, and beauty are the image i n our world of this impersonal and divine order of the universe . Nothing inferior to them is worthy to be the inspiration of men who accept the fact of death. Above those institutions which are concerned with pro­ tecting rights and persons and democratic freedoms, others must be invented for the purpose of exposing and abol­ ishing everything in contemporary life which buries the soul under injustice, lies, and ugliness. They must be invented, for they are unknown, and it is impossible to doubt that they are indispensable. From Selected f.ssays 1 934-43 by Simone Wei!, chosen and translated by Richard Rees, Oxford University Press, London , 1 962. Originally pub­ lished as 'La Personne et le sacre' in Ecn"ts de Londres et demieres lettres , Gallimard, Paris, 1 957. THE SELF e possess nothing in the world - a mere chance can Wstrip us of everything - except the power to say ' I ' . That i s what w e have to give to God - i n other words, to destroy. There is absolutely no other free act which it is given us to accomplish - only the destruction of the ' 1 ' . Offering : W e cannot offer anything but the ' 1 ' , and all we call an offering is merely a label attached to a compensatory assertion of the ' I ' . Nothing i n the world can rob u s o f the power to say ' I ' . Nothing except extreme affliction. Nothing i s worse than extreme affliction which destroys the ' I ' from outside, because after that we can no longer destroy it ourselves. What happens to those whose ' I ' has been destroyed from outside by affliction ? It is not possible to imagine anything for them but annihilation according to the atheistic or materialistic conception . Though they may have lost their ' I ' , it does not mean that they have no more egoism. Quite the reverse . To be sure, this may occasionally happen when a dog-like devotion is brought about, but at other times the being is reduced to naked , vegetative egoism . An egoism without an ' 1 ' . 100 SIMONE WEIL - AN ANTIIOLOGY So long as we ourselves have begun the process of destroying the ' I ' , we can prevent any affliction from causing harm. For the ' I ' is not destroyed by external pressure without a violent revolt. If for the love of God we refuse to give ourselves over to this revolt, the destruction does not take place from outside but from within. Redemptive suffering. If a human being who is in a state of perfection and has through grace completely destroyed the ' I ' in himself, falls into that degree of affliction which corresponds for him to the destruction of the ' I ' from outside - we have there the cross in its fullness. Affliction can no longer destroy the ' I ' in him for the ' I ' in him no longer exists, having completely disappeared and left the place to God. But affliction produces an effect which is equivalent, on the plane of perfection, to the exterior destruction of the 1 It produces the absence of God. 'My God, why hast Thou forsaken me ?' What is this absence of God produced by extreme affliction within the perfect soul ? What is the value which is attached to it and which is known as redemptive suffering? Redemptive suffering is that by which evil really has fullness of being to the utmost extent of its capacity . By redemptive suffering, God is present in extreme evil. For the absence of God is the mode of divine presence which corresponds to evil - absence which is felt. He who has not God within himself cannot feel his presence . It is the purity, the perfection, the plenitude, the abyss of evil . Whereas hell is a false abyss ( cf. Thibon) . Hell is superficial . Hell is a nothingness which has the pretension and gives the illusion of being. Purely external destruction of the ' I ' is quasi-infernal suffering. External destruction with which the soul associates itself through love is expiatory suffering. The bringing about of the absence of God in a soul completely emptied of self through love is redemptive suffering. ' '. In affliction, the vital instinct survives all the attachments THE SELF 101 which have been torn away, and blindly fastens itself to everything which can provide it with support, like a plant fastens its tendrils. Gratitude (except in a base form) and justice are not conceivable in this state. Slavery . There is no longer the extra amount of energy required to support free­ will by which man takes the measure of things . Affliction, from this point of view, is hideous as life in its nakedness always is, like an amputated stump, like the swarming of insects. Life without form . Survival is then the only attachment. That is where extreme affliction begins - when all other attachments are replaced by that of survival . Attachment appears then in its nakedness without any other object but itself - Hell. It is by this mechanism that to those in affliction life appears as the one thing desirable, at the very time when their life is in no way preferable to death . In this state, to accept death is total detachment. Quasi-hell on earth. Complete uprooting in affliction. Human injustice as a general rule produces not martyrs but quasi-damned souls. Beings who have fallen into this quasi-hell are like someone stripped and wounded by robbers. They have lost the clothing of character. The greatest suffering which allows any of a man's roots to remain is at an infinite distance from this quasi-hell . When we do a service to beings thus uprooted and we receive in exchange discourtesy, ingratitude, betrayal , we are merely enduring a small share of their affliction. It is our duty to expose ourselves to it in a limited measure just as it is our duty to expose ourselves to affliction . When it comes we should endure it as we endure affliction , without referring it back to particular people, for it cannot be referred back to anything. There is something impersonal in quasi-infernal affliction as there is in perfection . For those whose ' I ' is dead we can do nothing, absolutely nothing. We never know, however, whether in a particular person the ' I ' is quite dead or only inanimate. If it is not 102 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY quite dead, love can reanimate it as though by an injection, but it must be love which is utterly pure without the slightest trace of condescension, for the least shade of contempt drives towards death. When the ' I ' is wounded from outside it starts by revolting in the most extreme and bitter manner like an animal at bay . But as soon as the ' I ' is half dead, it wants to be finished off and allows itself to sink into unconsciousness. If it is then awakened by a touch of love, there is sharp pain which results in anger and sometimes hatred for whoever has provoked this pain. Hence the apparently inexplicable vindictiveness of the fallen towards their benefactors. It can also happen that the love of the benefactor is not pure. Then, in the ' I ' , awakened by love but immediately wounded afresh by contempt, there surges up the bitterest of hatreds, a hatred which is legitimate. He, on the contrary, in whom the ' I ' is quite dead is in no way embarrassed by the love which is shown him . He takes what comes just as dogs and cats receive food, warmth and caresses, and, like them, he is eager to obtain as much as possible. As the case may be, he either attaches himself like a dog or accepts what comes to him with a certain indifference like a cat. Without the slightest scruple he absorbs all the energy of whoever tries to help him . Unfortunately in every charitable work there is a danger lest the majority of its clients should be composed of people with no scruples, and above all , of people in whom the ' I ' has been killed. The weaker the character of him who endures affliction, the more quickly is the ' I ' destroyed. To be more exact, the limit of the affliction which destroys the 'I' is situated at a greater or lesser distance according to the quality of the character, and the further it is the more the character is said to be strong. The position of this limit, whether near or far, is probably a fact of nature in the same way as a gift for THE SELF 1 03 mathematics, and he who, without having any faith, is proud of preserving his morale in difficult circumstances, has no more reason to be so than the youth who is conceited because mathematics come easily to him . He who believes in God is in danger of a still greater illusion - that of attributing to grace what is simply an essentially mechanical effect of nature. The agony of extreme affliction is the destruction of the ' I ' from outside : Arnolphe, Phedre, Lycaon . W e are right to fall on our knees, to make abject supplication when that violent death which is going to strike us down threatens to kill the ' I ' from outside even before life is destroyed . ' Niobe also, of the beautiful hair, thought of eating. ' That is sublime, in the same way as space in Giotto's frescoes. A humiliation which forces us to renounce even despair. The sin in me says ' I ' . I a m all . But this particular ' I ' i s God. And i t i s not a n ' I ' . Evil makes distinctions, i t prevents God from being equivalent to all . I t i s because of my wretchedness that I am ' I ' . I t is on account of the wretchedness of the universe that, in a sense, God is ' I ' (that is to say a person) . The Pharisees were people who relied on their own strength to be virtuous . Humility consists in knowing that in what we call ' I ' there is no source of energy by which we can rise . Everything without exception which is of value in me comes from somewhere other than myself, not as a gift but as a loan which must be ceaselessly renewed. Everything without exception which is in me is absolutely valueless ; and, among the gifts which have come to me from elsewhere, everything which I appropriate becomes valueless immediately I do so. 1 04 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY Perfect joy excludes even the very feeling of joy, for in the soul filled by the object no corner is left for saying ' I ' . We cannot imagine such joys when they are absent, thus the incentive for seeking them is lacking. From Gravity and Grace , translated by Emma Craufurd, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1 952. Originally published as La Pesanteur et La Grace, Pion, Paris, 1 947. THE N E E D S O F THE S O U L This excerpt forms the first part of The Need for Roots. Wn"tten during 1 942-3 and possibly after she was admitted to hospital, it is by this work that Simone Wei/ is probably best-known. Its appearance in 1 949 influenced a generation of thinkers and wn"ters both in and outside France. Camus, who was one of the first to recognize her genius, said he could not imagine a rebirth of Europe which did not take into account the analysis and proposals for social reform she drew up in this work. Quoting two of her phrases, 'Official history is believing the murderers at their word' and Who can admire Alexander with all his soul if he doesn 't have a base soul?', he pointed out in his preface how isolated a spin"t the wn"ter of those words had been in inter-war France. Subsequently and ironically, the philosophy of existential engagement Simone Wei/ so amply exemplified with her life was populanzed in intellectual circles by Sartre and others. In the second part of the book, 'Uprootedness and Nation­ hood', she argues that in order for 'France ' to possess any proper meaning to its citizens, it would be necessary for them to be able to recognize and attach themselves to both what was smaller than France, that's to say the region, and what was larger, that 's to say Europe. In the third and final section, 'The Growing of Roots', she 1 06 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY defines physical labour as the spin'tual core of well-ordered social life. In his introduction to the English version of the work which came out in 1952, T. S. Eliot described it as the work of one who was 'more tntly a lover of order and hierarchy than most of those who call themselves Conser­ vative and more truly a lover of the people than most of those who call themselves Socialist. ' (Eliot, 1 952) The notion of obligations comes before that of rights, which is subordinate and relative to the former. A right is not effectual by itself, but only in relation to the obligation to which it corresponds, the effective exercise of a right springing not from the individual who possesses it, but from other men who consider themselves as being under a certain obligation towards him. Recognition of an obliga­ tion makes it effectual. An obligation which goes unrecog­ nized by anybody loses none of the full force of its existence. A right which goes unrecognized by anybody is not worth very much. It makes nonsense to say that men have, on the one hand, rights, and on the other hand, obligations. Such words only express differences in point of view. The actual relationship between the two is as between object and subject. A man, considered in isolation, only has duties, amongst which are certain duties towards himself. Other men, seen from his point of view, only have rights. He, in his turn, has rights, when seen from the point of view of other men, who recog­ nize that they have obligations towards him. A man left alone in the universe would have no rights whatever, but he would have obligations. The notion of rights, being of an objective order, is inseparable from the notions of existence and reality. This becomes apparent when the obligation descends to the realm of fact ; consequently, it always involves to a certain extent the taking into account of actual given states and particular situations. Rights are always found to be related to certain conditions. Obligations alone remain independent THE NEEDS OF THE SOUL 1 07 of conditions. They belong to a realm situated above all conditions, because it is situated above this world. The men of 1789 did not recognize the existence of such a realm. All they recognized was the one on the human plane . That is why they started off with the idea of rights. But at the same time they wanted to postulate absolute principles. This contradiction caused them to tumble into a confusion of language and ideas which is largely responsible for the present political and social confusion. The realm of what is eternal, universal, unconditioned is other than the one con­ ditioned by facts, and different ideas hold sway there, ones which are related to the most secret recesses of the human soul . Obligations are only binding on human beings. There are no obligations for collectivities, as such. But they exist for all human beings who constitute, serve, command or repre­ sent a collectivity, in that part of their existence which is related to the collectivity as in that part which is indepen­ dent of it. All human beings are bound by identical obligations, although these are performed in different ways according to particular circumstances. No human being, whoever he may be, under whatever circumstances, can escape them without being guilty of crime ; save where there are two genuine obligations which are in fact incompatible, and a man is forced to sacrifice one of them. The imperfections of a social order can be measured by the number of situations of this kind it harbours within itself. But even in such a case, a crime is committed if the obligation so sacrificed is not merely sacrificed in fact, but its existence denied into the bargain . The object o f any obligation, i n the realm of human affairs, is always the human being as such . There exists an obliga­ tion towards every human being for the sole reason that he or she is a human being, without any other condition re­ quiring to be fulfilled, and even without any recognition of such obligation on the part of the individual concerned. 1 08 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY This obligation is not based upon any de facto situation, nor upon jurisprudence, customs, social structure, relative state of forces, historical heritage , or presumed historical orientation ; for no de facto situation is able to create an obligation. This obligation is not based upon any convention ; for all conventions are liable to be modified according to the wishes of the contracting parties, whereas in this case no change in the mind and will of Man can modify anything whatsoever. This obligation is an eternal one. It is coextensive with the eternal destiny of human beings. Only human beings have an eternal destiny. Human collectivities have not got one . Nor are there, in regard to the latter, any direct obliga­ tions of an eternal nature. Duty towards the human being as such - that alone is eternal . This obligation is an unconditional one. If it is founded on something, that something, whatever it is, does not form part of our world. In our world, it is not founded on anything at all. It is the one and only obligation in connec­ tion with human affairs that is not subject to any condition . This obligation has no foundation, but only a verification in the common consent accorded by the universal con­ science. It finds expression in some of the oldest written texts which have come down to us. It is recognized by everybody without exception in every single case where it is not attacked as a result of interest or passion . And it is in relation to it that we measure our progress. The recognition of this obligation is expressed in a con­ fused and imperfect form, that is, more or less imperfect according to the particular case, by what are called positive rights. To the extent to which positive rights are in contra­ diction with it, to that precise extent is their origin an illegitimate one. Although this eternal obligation is coextensive with the eternal destiny of the human being, this destiny is not its direct motive . A human being's eternal destiny cannot be the motive of any obligation, for it is not subordinate to external actions. THE NEEDS OF THE SOUL 1 09 The fact that a human being possesses an eternal destiny imposes only one obligation : respect. The obligation is only performed if the respect is effectively expressed in a real , not a fictitious, way ; and this can only be done through the medium of Man's earthly needs. On this point, the human conscience has never varied . Thousands of years ago, the Egyptians believed that no soul could justify itself after death unless it could say : ' I have never let anyone suffer from hunger. ' All Christians know they are liable to hear Christ himself say to them one day : ' I was a n hungered, and y e gave m e no meat . ' Everyone looks on progress as being, in the first place, a transition to a state of human society in which people will not suffer from hunger. To no matter whom the question may be put in general terms, nobody is of the opinion that any man is innocent if, possessing food himself in abundance and find­ ing someone on his doorstep three parts dead from hunger, he brushes past without giving him anything. So it is an eternal obligation towards the human being not to let him suffer from hunger when one has the chance of coming to his assistance. This obligation being the most obvious of all , it can serve as a model on which to draw up the list of eternal duties towards each human being. I n order t o b e absolutely correctly made out, this list ought to proceed from the example just given by way of analogy . Consequently, the list of obligations towards the human being should correspond to the list of such human needs as are vital , analogous to hunger. Among such needs, there are some which are physical , like hunger itself. They are fairly easy to enumerate . They are concerned with protection against violence , housing, clothing, heating, hygiene and medical attention in case of illness . There are others which have no connection with the physical side of life, but are concerned with its moral side . Like the former, however, they are earthly, and are not directly related, so far as our intelligence is able to perceive, to the eternal destiny of Man . They form, like our physical needs, a necessary condition of our life on this earth. Which 1 10 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY means to say that if they are not satisfied, we fall little by little into a state more or less resembling death, more or less akin to a purely vegetative existence. They are much more difficult to recognize and to enu­ merate than are the needs of the body. But everyone recog­ nizes that they exist. All the different forms of cruelty which a conqueror can exercise over a subject population, such as massacre, mutilation, organized famine, enslave­ ment or large-scale deportation, are generally considered to be measures of a like description, even though a man's liberty or his native land are not physical necessities. Every­ one knows that there are forms of cruelty which can injure a man's life without injuring his body. They are such as deprive him of a certain form of food necessary to the life of the soul . Obligations, whether unconditional or relative, eternal or changing, direct or indirect with regard to human affairs, all stem , without exception, from the vital needs of the human being. Those which do not directly concern this, that or the other specific human being all exist to serve requirements which, with respect to Man, play a role analo­ gous to food . We owe a cornfield respect, not because of itself, but because it is food for mankind. In the same way, we owe our respect to a collectivity, of whatever kind - country, family, or any other - not for itself, but because it is food for a certain number of human souls. Actually, this obligation makes different attitudes, actions necessary according to different situations. But, taken by itself, it is absolutely identical for everybody. More particularly is this so for all those outside such a collectivity. The degree of respect owing to human collectivities is a very high one, for several reasons. To start with, each is unique, and, if destroyed, cannot be replaced. One sack of corn can always be substituted for another sack of corn. The food which a collectivity supplies THE NEEDS OF THE SOUL 111 for the souls of those who form part of it has no equivalent in the entire universe. Secondly, because of its continuity, a collectivity is al­ ready moving forward into the future . It contains food, not only for the souls of the living, but also for the souls of beings yet unborn which are to come into the world during the immediately succeeding centuries. Lastly, due to this same continuity, a collectivity has its roots in the past . It constitutes the sole agency for preserv­ ing the spiritual treasures accumulated by the dead, the sole transmitting agency by means of which the dead can speak to the living. And the sole earthly reality which is directly connected with the eternal destiny of Man is the irradiating light of those who have managed to become fully conscious of this destiny, transmitted from generation to generation . Because of all this, it may happen that the obligation towards a collectivity which is in danger reaches the point of entailing a total sacrifice . But it does not follow from this that collectivities are superior to human beings. It some­ times happens too, that the obligation to go to the help of a human being in distress makes a total sacrifice necessary, without that implying any superiority on the part of the individual so helped . A peasant may, under certain circumstances, be under the necessity, in order to cultivate his land, of risking ex­ haustion, illness or even death. But all the time he will be conscious of the fact that it is solely a matter of bread . Similarly, even when a total sacrifice is required, no more is owed to any collectivity whatever than a respect analo­ gous to the one owed to food . It very often happens that the roles are reversed . There are collectivities which, instead of serving as food , do just the opposite : they devour souls. In such cases, the social body is diseased, and the first duty is to attempt a cure ; in certain circumstances, it may be necessary to have recourse to surgical methods. With regard to this matter, too, the obligation for those inside as for those outside the collectivity is an identical one. 1 12 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY It also happens that a collectivity supplies insufficient food for the souls of those forming part of it. In that case, it has to be improved. Finally, there are dead collectivities which, without de­ vouring souls, don't nourish them either. If it is absolutely certain that they are well and truly dead, that it isn't just a question of a temporary lethargy, then and only then should they be destroyed. The first thing to be investigated is what are those needs which are for the life of the soul what the needs in the way of food, sleep and warmth are for the life of the body. We must try to enumerate and define them. They must never be confused with desires, whims, fancies and vices. We must also distinguish between what is fundamental and what is fortuitous. Man requires, not rice or potatoes, but food ; not wood or coal, but heating. In the same way, for the needs of the soul, we must recognize the different, but equivalent, sorts of satisfaction which cater for the same requirements. We must also distinguish be­ tween the soul's foods and poisons which, for a time, can give the impression of occupying the place of the former. The lack of any such investigation forces governments, even when their intentions are honest, to act sporadically and at random . Below are offered a few indications. ORDER The first of the soul's needs, the one which touches most nearly its eternal destiny, is order ; that is to say, a texture of social relationships such that no one is compelled to violate imperative obligations in order to carry out other ones. It is only where this, in fact, occurs that external circumstances have any power to inflict spiritual violence on the soul. For he for whom the threat of death or suffering is the one thing standing in the way of the performance of an obligation, can overcome this disability, and will only suffer in his body. But he who finds that circumstances, in fact, render the THE NEEDS OF THE SOUL 1 13 various acts necessitated by a series of strict obligations incompatible with one another is, without being able to offer any resistance thereto, made to suffer in his love of good. At the present time, a very considerable amount of con­ fusion and incompatibility exists between obligations. Whoever acts in such a way as to increase this incompati­ bility is a trouble-maker. Whoever acts in such a way as to diminish it is an agent of order. Whoever, so as to simplify problems, denies the existence of certain obligations has, in his heart, made a compact with crime. Unfortunately, we possess no method for diminishing this incompatibility. We cannot even be sure that the idea of an order in which all obligations would be compatible with one another isn't itself a fiction. When duty descends to the level of facts, so many independent relationships are brought into play that incompatibility seems far more likely than compatibility. Nevertheless, we have every day before us the example of a universe in which an infinite number of independent mechanical actions concur so as to produce an order that, in the midst of variations, remains fixed . Furthermore, we love the beauty of the world , because we sense behind it the presence of something akin to that wisdom we should like to possess to slake our thirst for good . I n a minor degree, really beautiful works of art are ex­ amples of ensembles in which independent factors concur, in a manner impossible to understand , so as to form a unique thing of beauty. Finally, a consciousness of the various obligations always proceeds from a desire for good which is unique, unchang­ ing and identical with itself for every man, from the cradle to the grave. This desire, perpetually stirring in the depths of our being, makes it impossible for us ever to resign ourselves to situations in which obligations are incompat­ ible with one another. Either we have recourse to lying in order to forget their existence, or we struggle blindly to extricate ourselves from them . 1 14 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY The contemplation of veritable works of art, and much more still that of the beauty of the world, and again much more that of the unrealized good to which we aspire, can sustain us in our efforts to think continually about that human order which should be the subject uppermost in our minds. The great instigators of violence have encouraged them­ selves with the thought of how blind , mechanical force is sovereign throughout the whole universe. By looking at the world with keener senses than theirs, we shall find a more powerful encouragement in the thought of how these innumerable blind forces are limited, made to balance one against the other, brought to form a united whole by something which we do not understand , but which we call beauty. If we keep ever-present in our minds the idea of a verit­ able human order, if we think of it as of something to which a total sacrifice is due should the need arise, we shall be in a similar position to that of a man travelling, without a guide, through the night, but continually thinking of the direction he wishes to follow. Such a traveller's way is lit by a great hope. Order is the first need of all ; it even stands above all needs properly so-called. To be able to conceive it, we must know what the other needs are. The first characteristic which distinguishes needs from desires, fancies or vices, and foods from gluttonous repasts or poisons, is that needs are limited, in exactly the same way as are the foods corresponding to them. A miser never has enough gold, but the time comes when any man provided with an unlimited supply of bread finds he has had enough. Food brings satiety. The same applies to the soul's foods. The second characteristic, closely connected with the first, is that needs are arranged in antithetical pairs and have to combine together to form a balance . Man requires food, but also an interval between his meals ; he requires warmth and coolness, rest and exercise. Likewise in the case of the soul's needs. THE NEEDS OF THE SOUL 1 15 What is called the golden mean actually consists in satis­ fying neither the one nor the other of two contrary needs. It is a caricature of the genuinely balanced state in which contrary needs are each fully satisfied in turn . LIB ERTY One of the indispensable foods of the human soul is liberty. Liberty, taking the word in its concrete sense, consists in the ability to choose . We must understand by that, of course, a real ability. Wherever men are living in commun­ ity, rules imposed in the common interest must necessarily limit the possibilities of choice . But a greater or lesser degree of liberty does not depend on whether the limits set are wider or narrower. Liberty attains its plenitude under conditions which are less easily gauged. Rules should be sufficiently sensible and sufficiently straightforward so that anyone who so desires and is blessed with average powers of application may be able to under­ stand, on the one hand the useful ends they serve, and on the other hand the actual necessities which have brought about their institution. They should emanate from a source of authority which is not looked upon as strange or hostile, but loved as something belonging to those placed under its direction . They should be sufficiently stable, general and limited in number for the mind to be able to grasp them once and for all, and not find itself brought up against them every time a decision has to be made. Under these conditions, the liberty of men of goodwill, though limited in the sphere of action, is complete in that of conscience . For, having incorporated the rules into their own being, the prohibited possibilities no longer present themselves to the mind, and have not to be rejected . Just as the habit, formed by education , of not eating disgusting or dangerous things is not felt by the normal man to be any limitation of his liberty in the domain of food . Only a child feels such a limitation. 1 16 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY Those who are lacking in goodwill or who remain ado­ lescent are never free under any form of society. When the possibilities of choice are so wide as to injure the commonweal , men cease to enjoy liberty. For they must either seek refuge in irresponsibility, puerility and indiffer­ ence - a refuge where the most they can find is boredom or feel themselves weighed down by responsibility at all times for fear of causing harm to others. Under such cir­ cumstances, men, believing, wrongly, that they are in pos­ session of liberty, and feeling that they get no enjoyment out of it, end up by thinking that liberty is not a good thing. OBEDIENCE Obedience i s a vital need of the human soul. I t is of two kinds : obedience to established rules and obedience to human beings looked upon as leaders. It presupposes con­ sent, not in regard to every single order received, but the kind of consent that is given once and for all, with the sole reservation, in case of need, that the demands of conscience be satisfied. I t requires to be generally recognized, and above all by leaders themselves, that consent and not fear of punishment or hope of reward constitutes, in fact, the mainspring of obedience, so that submission may never be mistaken for servility. It should also be realized that those who com­ mand, obey in their turn, and the whole hierarchy should have its face set in the direction of a goal whose importance and even grandeur can be felt by all, from the highest to the lowest. Obedience being a necessary food of the soul, whoever is definitely deprived of it is ill. Thus, any body politic governed by a sovereign ruler accountable to nobody is in the hands of a sick man . That is why wherever a man is placed for life at the head of the social organism, he ought to be a symbol and not a ruler, as is the case with the king of England ; etiquette ought also to restrict his freedom more narrowly than that THE NEEDS OF THE SOUL 1 17 of any single man of the people . In this way, the effective rulers, rulers though they be, have somebody over them ; on the other hand, they are able to replace each other in un­ broken continuity, and consequently to receive, each in his turn, that indispensable amount of obedience due to him . Those who keep masses of men in subjection by exer­ cising force and cruelty deprive them at once of two vital foods, liberty and obedience ; for it is no longer within the power of such masses to accord their inner consent to the authority to which they are subjected . Those who encour­ age a state of things in which the hope of gain is the principal motive take away from men their obedience, for consent which is its essence is not something which can be sold . There are any number o f signs showing that the men of our age have now for a long time been starved of obedience. But advantage has been taken of the fact to give them slavery. RESPO N S I B I L ITY I nitiative and responsibility, t o feel one i s useful and even indispensable, are vital needs of the human soul . Complete privation from this point o f view i s the case of the unemployed person, even if he receives assistance to the extent of being able to feed, clothe and house himself. For he represents nothing at all in the economic life of his country, and the voting paper which represents his share in its political life doesn't hold any meaning for him. The manual labourer is in a scarcely better position . For this need to be satisfied it is necessary that a man should often have to take decisions in matters great or small affecting interests that are distinct from his own, but in regard to which he feels a personal concern . He also re­ quires to be continually called upon to supply fresh efforts . Finally, he requires to be able to encompass in thought the entire range of activity of the social organism to which he belongs, including branches in connection with which he 1 18 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY has never to take a decision or offer any advice. For that, he must be made acquainted with it, be asked to interest him­ self in it, be brought to feel its value, its utility and, where necessary, its greatness, and be made fully aware of the part he plays in it. Every social organism, of whatever kind it may be, which does not provide its members with these satisfactions, is diseased and must be restored to health . I n the case of every person of fair!y strong character, the need to show initiative goes so far as the need to take command. A flourishing local and regional life, a host of educational activities and youth movements, ought to fur­ nish whoever is able to take advantage of it with the oppor­ tunity to command at certain periods of his life. · E Q U A LITY Equality is a vital need of the human soul . It consists in a recognition, at once public, general, effective and genuinely expressed in institutions and customs, that the same amount of respect and consideration is due to every human being because this respect is due to the human being as such and is not a matter of degree. It follows that the inevitable differences among men ought never to imply any difference in the degree of re­ spect. And so that these differences may not be felt to bear such an implication , a certain balance is necessary between equality and inequality. A certain combination of equality and inequality is formed by equality of opportunity. If no matter who can attain the social rank corresponding to the function he is capable of filling, and if education is sufficiently generalized so that no one is prevented from developing any capacity simply on account of his birth, the prospects are the same for every child . In this way, the prospects for each man are the same as for any other man, both as regards himself when young, and as regards his children later on. But when such a combination acts alone, and not as one THE NEt.JJS OF THE SOUL 1 19 factor amongst other factors, it ceases to constitute a balance and contains great dangers. To begin with , for a man who occupies an inferior pos­ ition and suffers from it to know that his position is a result of his incapacity and that everybody is aware of the fact is not any consolation, but an additional motive of bitterness ; according to the individual character, some men can there­ by be thrown into a state of depression , while others can be encouraged to commit crime. Then , in social life , a sort of aspirator towards the top is inevitably created. If a descending movement does not come to balance this ascending movement, the social body becomes sick . To the extent to which it is really possible for the son of a farm labourer to become one day a minister, to the same extent should it really be possible for the son of a minister to become one day a farm labourer. This second possibility could never assume any noticeable proportions without a very dangerous degree of social constraint. This sort of equality, if allowed full play by itself, can make social life fluid to the point of decomposing it. There are less clumsy methods of combining equality with differentiation . The first is by using proportion . Pro­ . portion can be defined as the combination of equality with inequality, and everywhere throughout the universe it is the sole factor making for balance . Applied to the maintenance of social equilibrium , it would impose on each man burdens corresponding to the power and well-being he enjoys, and corresponding risks in cases of incapacity or neglect . For instance, an employer who is incapable or guilty of an offence against his workmen ought to be made to suffer far more, both in the spirit and in the flesh , than a workman who is incapable or guilty of an offence against his employer. Furthermore, all workmen ought to know that this is so. It would imply, on the one hand, a certain rearrangement with regard to risks, on the other hand, in criminal law, a conception of punishment i n which social rank, a s a n aggravating circumstance, would necessarily play an important part in deciding what the 1 20 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY penalty was to be. All the more reason, therefore, why the exercise of important public functions should carry with it serious personal risks . Another way of rendering equality compatible with differentiation would be to take away as far as possible all quantitative character from differences. Where there is only a difference in kind, not in degree, there is no inequality at all . By making money the sole, or almost the sole, motive of all actions, the sole, or almost the sole, measure of all things, the poison of inequality has been introduced every­ where. It is true that this inequality is mobile ; it is not attached to persons, for money is made and lost ; it is none the less real . There are two sorts of inequality, each with its corre­ sponding stimulant . A more or less stable inequality, like that of ancient France, produces an idolizing of superiors ­ not without a mixture of repressed hatred - and a submis­ sion to their commands. A mobile, fluid inequality pro­ duces a desire to better oneself. It is no nearer to equality than is stable inequality, and is every bit as unwholesome. The Revolution of 1 789, in putting forward equality, only succeeded in reality in sanctioning the substitution of one form of inequality for another. The more equality there is in a society, the smaller is the action of the two stimulants connected with the two forms of inequality, and hence other stimulants are necessary . Equality is all the greater in proportion as different human conditions are regarded as being, not more nor less than one another, but simply as other. Let us look on the professions of miner and minister simply as two different vocations, like those of poet and mathematician . And let the material hardships attaching to the miner's condition be counted in honour of those who undergo them. I n wartime, if an army is filled with the right spirit, a soldier is proud and happy to be under fire instead of at headquarters ; a general is proud and happy to think that the successful outcome of the battle depends on his fore- THE NE.EDS OF THE SOUL 121 thought ; and at the same time the soldier admires the general and the general the soldier. Such a balance constitutes an equality. There would be equality in social conditions if this balance could be found therein. It would mean honouring each human condition with those marks of respect which are proper to it, and are not just a hollow pretence. H IERARCHISM Hierarchism is a vital need of the human soul . It is com­ posed of a certain veneration , a certain devotion towards superiors, considered not as individuals, nor in relation to the powers they exercise , but as symbols. What they sym­ bolize is that realm situated high above all men and whose expression in this world is made up of the obligations owed by each man to his fellow-men. A veritable hierarchy pre­ supposes a consciousness on the part of the superiors of this symbolic function and a realization that it forms the only legitimate object of devotion among their subordinates. The effect of true hierarchism is to bring each one to fit himself morally into the place he occupies . HONOUR Honour is a vital need of the human soul. The respect due to every human being as such, even if effectively accorded, is not sufficient to satisfy this need, for it is identical for every one and unchanging ; whereas honour has to do with a human being considered not simply as such, but from the point of view of his social surroundings. This need is fully satisfied where each of the social organisms to which a human being belongs allows him to share in a noble tradition enshrined in its past history and given public acknowledgement. For example, for the need of honour to be satisfied in professional life, every profession requires to have some association really capable of keeping alive the memory of all 1 22 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY the store of nobility, heroism, probity, generosity and genius spent in the exercise of that profession . All oppression creates a famine in regard to the need of honour, for the noble traditions possessed by those suffering oppression go unrecognized, through lack of social prestige. Conquest always has that effect. Vercingetorix was no hero to the Romans. Had France been conquered by the English in the fifteenth century, Joan of Arc would be well and truly forgotten, even to a great extent by us. We now talk about her to the Annamites and the Arabs ; but they know very well that here in France we don't allow their heroes and saints to be talked about ; therefore the state in which we keep them is an affront to their honour. Social oppression has the same effects. Guynemer and Mermoz have become part of the public consciousness, thanks to the social prestige of aviation ; the sometimes incredible heroism displayed by miners or fishermen barely awakes an echo among miners or fishermen themselves. Deprivation of honour attains its extreme degree with that total deprivation of respect reserved for certain cate­ gories of human beings. In France, this affects, under various forms, prostitutes, ex-convicts, police agents and the sub-proletariat composed of colonial immigrants and natives. Categories of this kind ought not to exist. Crime alone should place the individual who has com­ mitted it outside the social pale, and punishment should bring him back again inside it. PUN ISHMENT Punishment is a vital need of the human soul . There are two kinds of punishment, disciplinary and penal . The former offers security against failings with which it would be too exhausting to struggle if there were no exterior support. But the most indispensable punishment for the soul is that inflicted for crime. By committing crime, a man places himself, of his own accord, outside the chain of eternal obligations which bind every human being to every THE NEEDS OF THE SO UL 1 23 other one . Punishment alone can weld him back again ; fully so , if accompanied by consent on his part ; otherwise only partially so. Just as the only way of showing respect for somebody suffering from hunger is to give him something to eat, so the only way of showing respect for somebody who has placed himself outside the law is to reinstate him inside the law by subjecting him to the punishment or­ dained by the law . The need of punishment is not satisfied where, as is generally the case, the penal code is merely a method of exercising pressure through fear. So that this need may be satisfied, it is above all necessary that everything connected with the penal law should wear a solemn and consecrated aspect ; that the majesty of the law should make its presence felt by the court, the police, the accused, the guilty man - even when the case dealt with is of minor importance, provided it entails a possible loss of liberty. Punishment must be an honour. It must not only wipe out the stigma of the crime, but must be regarded as a supplementary form of education, compelling a higher de­ votion to the public good. The severity of the punishment must also be in keeping with the kind of obligation which has been violated, and not with the interests of public security. The discredit attaching to the police, the irresponsible conduct of the judiciary, the prison system, the permanent social stigma cast upon ex-convicts, the scale of penalties which provides a much harsher punishment for ten acts of petty larceny than for one rape or certain types of murder, and which even provides punishments for ordinary mis­ fortune - all this makes it impossible for there to exist among us, in France, anything that deserves the name of punishment . For offences, as for crimes, the relative degree of immunity should increase, not as you go up, but as you go down the social scale. Otherwise the hardships inflicted will be felt to be in the nature of constraints or even abuses of power, and will no longer constitute punishments. Punishment only 1 24 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY takes place where the hardship is accompanied at some time or another, even after it is over, and in retro­ spect, by a feeling of justice. Just as the musician awakens the sense of beauty in us by sounds, so the penal system should know how to awaken the sense of justice in the criminal by the infliction of pain, or even, if need be, of death . And in the same way as we can say of the apprentice who injures himself at his trade, that it is the trade which is getting into him , so punishment is a method for getting justice into the soul of the criminal by bodily suffering. The question of the best means to employ to prevent a conspiracy from arising in high places with the object of obtaining immunity from the law, is one of the most diffi­ cult political problems to solve. It can only be solved if there are men whose duty it is to prevent such a conspiracy, and whose situation in life is such that they are not tempted to enter it themselves. FREEDOM O F OPIN ION Freedom of opinion and freedom of association are usually classed together. It is a mistake. Save in the case of natural groupings, association is not a need , but an expedient em­ ployed in the practical affairs of life . On the other hand, complete, unlimited freedom of ex­ pression for every sort of opinion, without the least restric­ tion or reserve, is an absolute need on the part of the intelligence . It follows from this that it is a need of the soul, for when the intelligence is ill-at-ease the whole soul is sick. The nature and limits of the satisfaction corresponding to this need are inscribed in the very structure of the various faculties of the soul . For the same thing can be at once limited and unlimited , just as one can produce the length of a rectangle indefinitely without it ceasing to be limited in width . In the case of a human being, the intelligence can be exercised in three ways. It can work on technical problems, that is to say, discover means to achieve an already given THE NEEDS OF THE SOUL 1 25 objective. It can provide light when a choice lies before the will concerning the path to be followed. Finally, it can operate alone, separately from the other faculties, in a purely theoretical speculation where all question of action has been provisionally set aside. When the soul is in a healthy condition , it is exercised in these three ways in turn, with different degrees of freedom . In the first function , it acts as a servant . In the second function , it acts destructively and requires to be reduced to silence immediately it begins to supply arguments to that part of the soul which, in the case of anyone not in a state of perfection, always places itself on the side of evil . But when it operates alone and separately, it must be in possession of sovereign liberty ; otherwise something essential is wanting to the human being. The same applies in a healthy society . That is why it would be desirable to create an absolutely free reserve in the field of publication, but in such a way as for it to be understood that the works found therein did not pledge their authors in any way and contained no direct advice for readers. There it would be possible to find, set out in their full force, all the arguments in favour of bad causes. It would be an excellent and salutary thing for them to be so displayed . Anybody could there sing the praises of what he most condemns. It would be publicly recognized that the object of such works was not to define their authors' atti­ tudes vis-a-vis the problems of life, but to contribute, by preliminary researches, towards a complete and correct tabulation of data concerning each problem. The law would see to it that their publication did not involve any risk of whatever kind for the author. On the other hand, publications destined to influence what is called opinion , that is to say, in effect, the conduct of life, constitute acts and ought to be subjected to the same restrictions as are all acts. In other words, they should not cause unlawful harm of any kind to any human being, and above all, should never contain any denial, explicit or im­ plicit, of the eternal obligations towards the human being, 1 26 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY once these obligations have been solemnly recognized by law. The distinction between the two fields, the one which is outside action and the one which forms part of action, is impossible to express on paper in juridical terminology. But that doesn't prevent it from being a perfectly clear one . The separate existence of these two fields is not difficult to establish in fact, if only the will to do so is sufficiently strong. It is obvious, for example, that the entire daily and weekly press comes within the second field ; reviews also, for they all constitute, individually, a focus of radiation in regard to a particular way of thinking ; only those which were to renounce this function would be able to lay claim to total liberty. The same applies to literature. It would solve the argu­ ment which arose not long ago on the subject of literature and morals, and which was clouded over by the fact that all the talented people, through professional solidarity, were found on one side, and only fools and cowards on the other. But the attitude of the fools and cowards was none the less, to a large extent, consistent with the demands of reason. Writers have an outrageous habit of playing a double game. Never so much as in our age have they claimed the role of directors of conscience and exercised it . Actu­ ally, during the years immediately preceding the war, no one challenged their right to it except the savants. The position formerly occupied by priests in the moral life of the country was held by physicists and novelists, which is suffi­ cient to gauge the value of our progress. But if somebody called upon writers to render an account of the orientation set by their influence, they barricaded themselves indig­ nantly behind the sacred privilege of art for art's sake. There is not the least doubt, for example, that Andre Gide has always known that books like Les Nourritures Terrestres and Les Caves du Vatican have exercised an influence on the practical conduct of life of hundreds of young people, and he has been proud of the fact. There is, THE NEEDS OF THE SOUL 1 27 then, no reason for placing such books behind the inviolable barrier of art for art's sake, and sending to prison a young fellow who pushes somebody off a train in motion . 1 One might just as well claim the privileges of art for art's sake in support of crime. At one time the Surrealists came pretty close to doing so . All that has been repeated by so many idiots ad nauseam about the responsibility of our writers in the defeat of France in 1 940 is, unfortunately, only too true. I f a writer, thanks to the complete freedom of expression accorded to pure intelligence, publishes written matter which goes contrary to the moral principals recognized by law, and if later on he becomes a notorious focus of influ­ ence, it is simple enough to ask him if he is prepared to state publicly that his writings do not express his personal attitude. If he is not prepared to do so, it is simple enough to punish him. If he lies, it is simple enough to discredit him. Moreover, it ought to be recognized that the moment a writer fills a role among the influences directing public opinion, he cannot claim to exercise unlimited freedom . Here again, a juridical definition is impossible ; but the facts are not really difficult to discern. There is no reason at all why the sovereignty of the law should be limited to the field of what can be expressed in legal formulae, since that sovereignty is exercised just as well by judgments in equity. Besides, the need of freedom itself, so essential to the intellect, calls for a corresponding protection against suggestion , propaganda, influence by means of obsession . These are methods of constraint, a special kind of con­ straint, not accompanied by fear or physical distress, but which is none the less a form of violence. Modern technique places extremely potent instruments at its service. This constraint is, by its very nature, collective, and human souls are its victims. 1 'd'emprisonner un gart;on qui jette que/qu'wz hors d'un train en marche ' : a reference to a gratuitous act performed by Lafcadio, hero of Andre Gide's Caves du Vatican, who pushes somebody off a train in Italy to prove to himself that he is capable of committing any act whatever, however motiveless, unre· lated to preceding events (A. F. Wills] . 1 28 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY Naturally, the State is guilty of crime if it makes use of such methods itself, save in cases where the public safety is absolutely at stake. But it should, furthermore, prevent their use. Publicity, for example, should be rigorously con­ trolled by law and its volume very considerably reduced ; it should also be severely prohibited from ever dealing with subjects which belong to the domain of thought. Likewise, repression could be exercised against the press, radio broadcasts, or anything else of a similar kind, not only for offences against moral principles publicly recognized, but also for baseness of tone and thought, bad taste, vul­ garity or a subtly corrupting moral atmosphere. This sort of repression could take place without in any way infringing on freedom of opinion. For instance, a newspaper could be suppressed without the members of its editorial staff losing the right to go on publishing wherever they liked, or even, in the less serious cases, remain associated to carry on the same paper under another name. Only, it would have been publicly branded with infamy and would run the risk of being so again . Freedom of opinion can be claimed solely ­ and even then with certain reservations - by the journalist, not by the paper ; for it is only the journalist who is capable of forming an opinion. Generally speaking, all problems to do with freedom of expression are clarified if it is posited that this freedom is a need of the intelligence, and that intelligence resides solely in the human being, individually considered. There is no such thing as a collective exercise of the intelligence . It follows that no group can legitimately claim freedom of expression, because no group has the slightest need of it. In fact the opposite applies. Protection of freedom of thought requires that no group should be permitted by law to express an opinion. For when a group starts having opinions, it inevitably tends to impose them on its mem­ bers. Sooner or later, these individuals find themselves debarred, with a greater or lesser degree of severity, and on a number of problems of greater or lesser importance, from expressing opinions opposed to those of the group , unless THE NEEDS OF THE SOUL 1 29 they care to leave it. But a break with any group to which one belongs always involves suffering - at any rate of a sentimental kind. And just as danger, exposure to suffering are healthy and necessary elements in the sphere of action, so are they unhealthy influences in the exercise of the intel­ ligence. A fear, even a passing one, always provokes either a weakening or a tautening, depending on the degree of cour­ age , and that is all that is required to damage the extremely delicate and fragile instrument of precision which consti­ tutes our intelligence. Even friendship is, from this point of view, a great danger. The intelligence is defeated as soon as the expression of one's thoughts is preceded , explicitly or implicitly, by the little word 'we' . And when the light of the intelligence grows dim, it is not very long before the love of good becomes lost . The immediate, practical solution would be the abolition of political parties. Party strife, as it existed under the Third Republic, is intolerable. The single party, which is, moreover, its inevitable outcome, is the worst evil of all. The only remaining possibility is a public life without parties. Nowadays, such an idea strikes us as a novel and daring proposition . All the better, since something novel is what is wanted . But, in point of fact , it is only going back to the tradition of 1 789. In the eyes of the people of 1 789, there was literally no other possibility. A public life like ours has been over the course of the last half-century would have seemed to them a hideous nightmare . They would never have believed it possible that a representative of the people should so divest himself of all personal dignity as to allow himself to become the docile member of a party. Moreover, Rousseau had clearly demonstrated how party strife automatically destroys the Republic . He had foretold its effects. It would be a good thing just now to encourage the reading of the Contrat Social. Actually, at the present time, wherever there were political parties, democracy is dead. We all know that the parties in England have a certain tradition, spirit and function making it impossible to com­ pare them to anything else. We all know, besides, that the 1 30 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY rival teams in the United States are not political parties. A democracy where public life is made up of strife between political parties is incapable of preventing the formation of a party whose avowed aim is the overthrow of that demo­ cracy . If such a democracy brings in discriminatory laws, it cuts its own throat. If it doesn't, it is just as safe as a little bird in front of a snake. A distinction ought to be drawn between two sorts of associations : those concerned with interests, where organi­ zation and discipline would be countenanced up to a certain point, and those concerned with ideas, where such things would be strictly forbidden. Under present conditions, it is a good thing to allow people to group themselves together to defend their interests, i n other words, their wage receipts and so forth , and to leave these associations to act within very narrow limits and under the constant supervision of the authorities. But such associations should not be allowed to have anything to do with ideas. Associations in which ideas are being canvassed should be not so much associ­ ations as more or less fluid social mediums. When some action is contemplated within them, there is no reason why it need be put into execution by any persons other than those who approve of it. In the working-class movement, for example, such a distinction would put an end to the present inextricable confusion . In the period before the war, the working-man's attention was being continually pulled in three directions at once . In the first place, by the struggle for higher wages ; secondly, by what remained - growing ever feebler, but still showing some signs of life - of the old trade-union spirit of former days, idealist and more or less libertarian in charac­ ter ; and, lastly, by the political parties. Very often, when a strike was on, the workmen who struggled and suffered would have been quite incapable of deciding for themselves whether it was all a matter of wages, a revival of the old trade-union spirit, or a political manoeuvre conducted by a party ; and nobody looking on from the outside was in any better position to judge. THE NEEDS OF THE SOUL 131 That is an impossible state of affairs . When the war broke out, the French trade unions were dead or moribund, in spite of their millions of members - or because of them . They again took on some semblance of life, after a pro­ longed lethargy, when the Resistance against the invader got under way. That doesn't prove that they are viable. It is perfectly clear that they had been all but destroyed by two sorts of poison, each of which by itself is deadly. Trade unions cannot flourish if at their meetings the workmen are obsessed by their earnings to the same extent as they are in the factory, when engaged in piece-work. To begin with , because the result is that sort of moral death always brought about by an obsession in regard to money , Next, because the trade union, having become , under present social conditions, a factor continually acting upon the economic life of the country, ends up inevitably by being transformed into a single, compulsory, professional organization, obliged to toe the line in public affairs . It has then been changed into the semblance of a corpse. Besides, it is no less evident that trade unions cannot live in intimate contact with political parties. There is some­ thing resulting from the normal play of mechanical forces which makes such a thing quite impossible. For an anal­ ogous reason, moreover, the Socialist Party cannot live side by side with the Communist Party, because the latter's party character is, as it were, marked to a so much greater degree. Furthermore, the obsession about wages strengthens Communist influence, because questions to do with money, however closely they may affect the majority of men, pro­ duce at the same time in all men a sensation of such deadly boredom that it requires to be compensated by the apoca­ lyptic prospect of the Revolution , according to Communist tenets. If the middle classes haven't the same need of an apocalypse, it is because long rows of figures have a poetry, a prestige which tempers in some sort the boredom assoc­ iated with money ; whereas, when money is counted in sixpences, we have boredom in its pure, unadulterated 132 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY state . N evertheless, the taste shown by bourgeois, both great and small, for Fascism, indicates that, in 5pite of everything, they too can feel bored . U nder the Vichy Government, single and compulsory professional organizations for workmen have been created . It is a pity that they have been given , according to the modern fashion , the name of corporation , which denotes, in reality, something so very different and so beautiful . But it is a good thing that such dead organizations should be there to take over the dead part of trade-union activity. It would be dangerous to do away with them. It is far better to charge them with the day-to-day business of dealing with wages and what are called immediate demands. As for the political parties, if they were all strictly prohibited in a general atmosphere of liberty, it is to be hoped their underground existence would at any rate be made difficult for them . In that event, the workmen's trade unions, if they still retain a spark of any real life, could become again, little by little, the expression of working-class thought, the instrument of working-class integrity. According to the traditions of the French working-class movement, which has always looked upon itself as responsible for the whole world, they would con­ cern themselves with everything to do with justice - including, where necessary, questions about wages ; but only at long intervals and to rescue human beings from poverty . Naturally, they would have to be able to exert an influence on professional organizations, according to methods of pro­ cedure defined by law. There would, perhaps, only be advantages to be gained by making it illegal for professional organizations to launch a strike, and allowing trade unions - with certain restrictions ­ to do so, while at the same time attaching risks to this responsibility, prohibiting any sort of coercion, and safe­ guarding the continuity of economic life. As for the lock-out, there is no reason why it should not be entirely suppressed . The authorized existence of associations for promoting ideas could be subject to two conditions. First, that excommunication THE NEEDS OF THE SO UL 133 may not b e applied. Recruitment would b e voluntary and as a result of personal affinity, without, however, making any­ body liable to be invited to subscribe to a collection of assertions crystallized in written form . But once a member had been admitted, he could not be expelled except for some breach of integrity or undermining activities ; which latter offence would, moreover, imply the existence of an illegal organization, and consequently expose the offender to a more severe punishment. This would , in fact, amount to a measure of public safety, experience having shown that totalitarian States are set up by totalitarian parties, and that these totalitarian parties are formed by dint of expulsions for the crime of having an opinion of one's own . The second condition could be that ideas must really be put into circulation, and tangible proof of such circulation given in the shape of pamphlets, reviews or typed bulletins in which problems of general interest were discussed . Too great a uni­ formity of opinion would render any such association suspect. For the rest, all associations for promoting ideas would be authorized to act according as they thought fit, on condition that they didn't break the law or exert any sort of disciplinary pressure on their members. As regards associations for promoting interests, their con­ trol would, in the first place, involve the making of a distinc­ tion, namely, that the word 'interest' sometimes expresses a need and at other times something quite different. In the case of a poor working-man, interest means food , lodging and heat­ ing. For an employer, it means something of a different kind. When the word is taken in its first sense , the action of the authorities should be mainly to stimulate, uphold and defend the interests concerned. When used in its second sense, the action of the authorities should be continually to supervise , limit and , whenever possible, curb the activities of the associations representing such interests. It goes without saying that the severest restrictions and the hardest punish­ ments should be reserved for those which are, by their nature, the most powerful . 1 34 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY What has been called freedom of association has been, in fact, up to now, freedom for associations. But associations have not got to be free ; they are instruments, they must be held in bondage . Only the human being is fit to be free. As regards freedom of thought, it is very nearly true to say that without freedom there is no thought. But it is truer still to say that when thought is non-existent, it is non-free into the bargain . There has been a lot of freedom of thought over the past few years, but no thought. Rather like the case of a child who, not having any meat, asks for salt with which to season it. S E C U R ITY Security i s a n essential need o f the soul. Security means that the soul is not under the weight of fear or terror, except as the result of an accidental conjunction of circumstances and for brief and exceptional periods. Fear and terror, as permanent states of the soul, are wellnigh mortal poisons, whether they be caused by the threat of unemployment, police persecution, the presence of a foreign conqueror, the probability of invasion, or any other calamity which seems too much for human strength to bear. The Roman masters used to place a whip in the hall within sight of their slaves, knowing that this spectacle reduced their hearts to that half-dead condition indispensable for slavery. On the other hand, according to the Egyptians, the just man should be able to say after death : 'I never caused anyone any fear'. Even if permanent fear constitutes a latent state only, so that its painful effects are only rarely experienced directly, it remains always a disease. It is a semi-paralysis of the soul. RISK Risk is an essential need of the soul. The absence of risk produces a type of boredom which paralyses in a different way from fear, but almost as much. Moreover, there are certain situations which, involving as they do a diffused THE NEEDS OF THE SOUL 135 anguish without any clearly defined risks, spread the two kinds of disease at once. Risk is a form of danger which provokes a deliberate reaction ; that is to say, it doesn't go beyond the soul's resources to the point of crushing the soul beneath a load of fear. In some cases, there is a gambling aspect to it ; in others , where some definite obligation forces a man to face it, it represents the finest possible stimulant. The protection of mankind from fear and terror doesn't imply the abolition of risk ; it implies, on the contrary, the permanent presence of a certain amount of risk in all aspects of social life ; for the absence of risk weakens courage to the point of leaving the soul, if the need should arise, without the slightest inner protection against fear. All that is wanted is for risk to offer itself under such conditions that it is not transformed into a sensation of fatality. P R I VATE P R O P E RTY Private property i s a vital need of the soul . The soul feels isolated, lost, if it is not surrounded by objects which seem to it like an extension of the bodily members. All men have an invincible inclination to appropriate in their own minds anything which over a long, uninterrupted period they have used for their work, pleasure or the necessities of life. Thus, a gardener, after a certain time, feels that the garden belongs to him. But where the feeling of appropriation doesn't coin­ cide with any legally recognized proprietorship, men are continually exposed to extremely painful spiritual wrenches. Once we recognize private property to be a need, this implies for everyone the possibility of possessing something more than the articles of ordinary consumption . The forms this need takes can vary considerably, depending on cir­ cumstances ; but it is desirable that the majority of people should own their house and a little piece of land round it, and, whenever not technically impossible, the tools of their trade. Land and livestock figure among the tools necessary to the peasant's trade . 136 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY The principle of private property is violated where the land is worked by agricultural labourers and farm-hands under the orders of an estate-manager, and owned by townsmen who receive the profits. For of all those who are connected with that land, there is not one who, in one way or another, is not a stranger to it. It is wasted, not from the point of view of corn-production, but from that of the satisfaction of the property-need which it could procure. Between this extreme case and that other one of the peasant who cultivates with his family the land he owns, there are a number of intermediate states where Man's need of appropriation is more or less unrecognized. C O L L E C T T V E P R O PE R TY Participation i n collective possessions - a participation con­ sisting not in any material enjoyment, but in a feeling of ownership - is a no less important need. It is more a question of a state of mind than of any legal formula. Where a real civic life exists, each one feels he has a personal ownership in the public monuments, gardens, ceremonial pomp and circumstance ; and a display of sumptuousness, in which nearly all human beings seek fulfilment, is in this way placed within the reach of even the poorest. But it isn't just the State which ought to provide this satisfaction ; it is every sort of collectivity in turn. A great modern factory is a waste from the point of view of the need of property ; for it is unable to provide either the workers, or the manager who is paid his salary by the board of directors, or the members of the board who never visit it, or the shareholders who are unaware of its existence, with the least satisfaction in connection with this need . When methods of exchange and acquisition are such as to involve a waste of material and moral foods, it is time they were transformed . There is no natural connection between property and money. The connection established nowadays is merely the result of a system which has made money the focus of all THE NEEDS OF THE SOUL 1 37 other possible motives. This system being an unhealthy one, we must bring about a dissociation in inverse order. The true criterion in regard to property is that it is legitimate so long as it is real . Or, to be more precise, the laws concerning property are so much the better the more advantages they draw from the opportunities offered by the possessions of this world for the satisfaction of the property­ need common to all men. Consequently, the present modes of acquisition and pos­ session require to be transformed in the name of the prin­ ciple of property. Any form of possession which doesn't satisfy somebody's need of private or collective property can reasonably be regarded as useless. That does not mean that it is necessary to transfer it to the State ; but rather to try and turn it into some genuine form of property. TRUTH The need of truth is more sacred than any other need . Yet it is never mentioned. One feels afraid to read when once one has realized the quantity and the monstrousness of the material falsehoods shamelessly paraded, even in the books of the most reputable authors. Thereafter one reads as though one were drinking from a contaminated well . There are men who work eight hours a day and make the immense effort of reading in the evenings so as to acquire knowledge. It is impossible for them to go and verify their sources in the big libraries. They have to take the book on trust. One has no right to give them spurious provender. What sense is there in pleading that authors act in good faith ? They don't have to do physical labour for eight hours a day. Society provides for their sustenance so that they may have the leisure and give themselves the trouble to avoid error. A pointsman responsible for a train accident and pleading good faith would hardly be given a sympath­ etic hearing. All the more reason why it is disgraceful to tolerate the 138 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY existence of newspapers on which , as everybody knows, not one of the collaborators would be able to stop, unless he were prepared from time to time to tamper knowingly with the truth. The public is suspicious of newspapers, but its suspicions don't save it. Knowing, in a general way, that a newspaper contains both true and false statements, it divides the news up into these two categories, but in a rough-and-ready fashion, in accordance with its own predilections. It is thus delivered over to error. We all know that when journalism becomes indistin­ guishable from organized lying, it constitutes a crime. But we think it is a crime impossible to punish . What is there to stop the punishment of activities once they are recognized to be criminal ones? Where does this strange notion of non­ punishable crimes come from ? It constitutes one of the most monstrous deformations of the judicial spirit. Isn't it high time it were proclaimed that every discern­ ible crime is a punishable one, and that we are resolved, if given the opportunity, to punish all crimes ? A few straightforward measures of public salubrity would protect the population from offences against the truth . The first would be to set up, with such protection in view, special courts enjoying the highest prestige, com­ posed of judges specially selected and trained. They would be responsible for publicly condemning any avoidable error, and would be able to sentence to prison or hard labour for repeated commission of the offence, aggravated by proven dishonesty of intention. For instance, a lover of Ancient Greece, reading in one of Maritain's books : 'The greatest thinkers of antiquity had not thought of condemning slavery', would indict Maritain before one of these tribunals. He would take along with him the only important reference to slavery that has come down to u� - the one from Aristotle. He would invite the judges to read the sentence : ' Some people assert that slavery is absol­ utely contrary to nature and reason. ' He would observe that there is nothing to make us suppose these particular 'people' THE NEEDS OF THE SO UL 1 39 were not among the greatest thinkers of antiquity. The court would censure Maritain for having published - when it was so easy for him to avoid falling into such a mistake - a false assertion, and one constituting, however unintention­ ally, an outrageous calumny against an entire civilization . All the daily papers, weeklies and others ; all the reviews and the radio would be obliged to bring the court's censure to the notice of the public, and, if need be, Maritain's answer. In this particular case, it seems most unlikely there could be one . On the occasion when Gringoire 1 published in extenso a speech attributed to a Spanish anarchist, who had been announced as going to speak at a meeting in Paris, but who in fact, at the last minute, had been unable to leave Spain, a court of this kind would not have been out of place . D is­ honesty being in such a case more patent than that two and two make four, no doubt prison or hard labour would not have been too severe a sentence . Under this system, anybody, no matter who, discovering an avoidable error in a printed text or radio broadcast, would be entitled to bring an action before these courts. The second measure would be to prohibit entirely all propaganda of whatever kind by the radio or daily press. These two instruments would only be allowed to be used for non-tendentious information. The aforesaid courts would be there to see that the in­ formation supplied was not tendentious. In the case of organs of information, they might have to pronounce judgment concerning not only erroneous asser­ tions, but also intentional and tendentious omissions. Circles in which ideas are discussed, and which desire to make them known, would only have a right to publish weekly, fortnightly or monthly journals. There is absolutely no need to appear more frequently in print, if one's object is to make people think instead of stupefying them. 1 Gn"nf?oire : a pre-war weekly of a virulent turn and politically reactionary [ A . F . Wills] . 1 40 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY The propriety of the methods of persuasion used would be guaranteed, thanks to the control exercised by the above courts, which would be able to suppress any publi­ cation guilty of too frequent a distortion of the truth ; though the editors would be allowed to let it reappear under another name. Nothing in all this would involve the slightest attack on public liberty. It would only mean satisfaction of the human soul's most sacred need - protection against sug­ gestion and falsehood. But, it will be objected, how can we guarantee the impartiality of the judges? The only guarantee, apart from that of their complete independence, is that they should be drawn from very different social circles ; be naturally gifted with a wide, clear and exact intelligence ; and be trained in a school where they receive not just a legal education, but above all a spiritual one, and only second­ arily an intellectual one. They must become accustomed to love truth. There is no possible chance of satisfying a people's need of truth, unless men can be found for this purpose who love truth. From The Need for Roots: Prelude to a Declaration of Duties Towards Mankind, translated by A. F. Wills, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1 95 2 : Putnam's Sons, New York, 1 95 3 . Originally published as L 'Enracinement: Prelude a une declaration des devoirs envers l'etre humain, Gallimard, Paris, 1949. THE GREA T B EA S T he Great Beast 1 i s the only object of idolatry, the only Tersatz of God, the only imitation of something which is infinitely far from me and which is I myself. If we could be egoistical it would be very pleasant. I t would b e a rest. But literally w e cannot. It is impossible for me to take myself as an end or, in consequence, my fellow man as an end, since he is my fellow. Nor can I take any material thing, because matter is still less capable of having finality conferred upon it than human beings are. Only one thing can be taken as an end , for in relation to the human person it possesses a kind of transcendence : this is the collective . The collective is the object of all idolatry, this it is which chains us to the earth . In the case of avarice : gold is of the social order. In the case of ambition : power is of the social order. Science and art are full of the social element also. And love ? Love is more or less of an exception : that is why we can go to God through love, not through avarice or ambition. Yet the social element is not 1 On the origin of this myth cf. Plato, Republic, Book VI . To adore the 'Great Beast' is to think and act in conformity with the prejudices and reactions of the multitude to the detriment of all personal search for truth and goodness. [G ustav Thibon] . 1 42 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY absent from love (passions excited by princes, celebrated people, all those who have prestige . . . ) . There are two goods of the same denomination but radically different from each other : one which is the opposite of evil and one which is the absolute. The absolute has no opposite. The relative is not the opposite of the absolute ; it is derived from it through a relationship which is not commutative . That which we want is the absolute good. That which is within our reach is the good which is correlated to evil. We betake ourselves to it by mistake, like the prince who starts to make love to the maid instead of the mistress. The error is due to the clothes. It is the social which throws the colour of the absolute over the relative. The remedy is in the idea of relationship. Relationship breaks its way out of the social . It is the monopoly of the individual . Society is the cave. The way out is solitude. To relate belongs to the solitary spirit. No crowd can conceive relationship. 'This is good or bad in relation to . . . ' , 'in so far as . . .' That escapes the crowd . A crowd cannot add things together. He who is above social life returns to it when he wishes, not so he who is below. It is the same with everything. A relationship which is not commutative between what is better and what is less good. The vegetative and the social are the two realms where the good does not enter. Christ redeemed the vegetative, not the social . He did not pray for the world. The social order is irreducibly that of the prince of this world . Our only duty with regard to the social is to try to l imit the evil of it . (Richelieu : the salvation of states lies only in this world . ) A society like the Church, which claims to b e divine is perhaps more dangerous on account of the ersatz good which it contains than on account of the evil which sullies lt. THE GREAT BEAST 143 Something of the social labelled divine : an intoxicating mixture which carries with it every sort of licence. Devil disguised . Conscience is deceived by the social . Our supplementary energy (imaginative) is to a great extent taken up with the social . It has to be detached from it. That is the most difficult of detachments. Meditation on the social mechanism is in this respect a purification of the first importance. To contemplate the social is as good a way of detachment as to retire from the world. That is why I have not been wrong to rub shoulders with politics for so long. It is only by entering the transcendental , the supernatural , the authentically spiritual order that man rises above the social . Until then, whatever he may do, the social is transcendent in relation to him. On the non-supernatural plane, society is that which keeps evil (certain forms of it) away by forming as it were a barrier. A society of criminals or people given over to vice, even if only composed of a handful of men , destroys this barrier. But what is it which impels people to enter such a society ? Either necessity, or laxity, or, usually, a mixture of the two . They do not think they are becoming involved, for they do not know that, apart from the supernatural, it is only society which prevents us from falling naturally into the most fearful vice and crime. They do not know that they are going to become different, for they do not know the extent of the region within themselves which can be changed by environment. They always become involved without knowing. Rome is the Great Beast of atheism and materialism, adoring nothing but itself. Israel is the Great Beast of religion . Neither the one nor the other is likeable. The Great B east is always repulsive . 144 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY Would a society in which only gravity reigned be able to exist, or is a little of the supernatural element a vital necessity? In Rome, perhaps, there was only gravity. With the Hebrews too, perhaps. Their God was heavy. Perhaps there was only one ancient people absolutely without mysticism : Rome. By what mystery ? It was an artificial city, made up of fugitives, just as Israel was . The Great Beast of Plato . The whole of Marxism, in so far as it is true, is contained in the page of Plato on the Great Beast ; and its refutation is there too. The power of the social element. Agreement between several men brings with it a feeling of reality. It brings with it also a sense of duty. Divergence, where this agreement is concerned, appears as a sin . Hence all returns to the fold are possible . The state of conformity is an imitation of grace. By a strange mystery - which is connected with the power of the social element - a profession can confer on quite ordinary men in their exercise of it, virtues which , if they were extended to all circumstances of life, would make of them heroes or saints. But the power of the social element makes these virtues natural. Accordingly they need a compensation. Pharisees : 'Verily I say unto you, they have received their reward. ' I nversely, Christ could have said of the publicans and prostitutes : 'Verily I say unto you, they have received their punishment' - that is to say social reprobation . In so far as they have received this, the Father who is in secret does not punish them . Whereas the sins which are not accompanied by social reprobation receive their full measure of punishment from the Father who is in secret. Thus social reprobation is a favour on the part of destiny. It turns into a supplementary evil, however, for those who, under the pressure of this reprobation, manufacture THE GREAT BEAST 1 45 for themselves eccentric social surroundings within which they have full licence. Criminal and homosexual circles, etc. The service of the false God (of the social Beast under whatever form it may be) purifies evil by eliminating its horror. Nothing seems evil to those who serve it except failure in its service. The service of the true God, on the other hand, allows the horror of evil to remain and even makes it more intense. Whilst this evil horrifies us, we yet love it as emanating from the will of God . Those who think today that one of the adversaries is on the side of the good, think also that that side will be victorious. 1 To watch a good , loved as such , condemned as it were by the oncoming tide of events is an intolerable suffering. The idea that that which does not exist any more may be a good is painful and we thrust it aside. That is submission to the Great Beast. The force of soul of the Communists comes from the fact that they are going, not only towards what they believe to be the good, but towards what they believe will surely and soon be brought about. Thus without being saints - they are a long way from that - they can endure dangers and sufferings which only a saint would bear for justice alone. In some respects the state of mind of the Communists is very analogous to that of the early Christians. That eschatological propaganda explains very well the persecutions of the first period. 'He to whom little is forgiven, the same loveth little . ' This concerns someone with whom social virtue occupies a very large place. Grace finds littie room to spare in him. Obedience to the Great Beast which conforms to the good ­ that is social virtue . A Pharisee is someone who is virtuous out of obedience to the Great Beast. 1 These lines were written in 1 942. 146 SI/v!ONE WElL - ill'I/ AlVTHOLOGY Charity can and should love in every country all that is a condition of the spiritual development of individuals, that is to say, on the one hand, social order, even if it is bad, as being less bad than disorder, on the other hand the language, ceremonies, customs - all that contains beauty all the poetry which the life of a country embraces. But a nation as such cannot be the object of supernatural love. It has no soul . It is a Great Beast. And yet a city . . . . But that is not social ; it is a human environment of which one is no more conscious than of the air one breathes. A contact with nature, the past, tradition . Rootedness lies in something other than the social. Patriotism . We must not have any love other than charity . A nation cannot be an object of charity. But a country can be one - as an environment bearing traditions which are eternal . Every country can be that. From Gravity and Grace, translated by Emma Craufurd, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1 95 2 ; originally published as La Pesanteur et Ia Grace, Pion, Paris, 1947. A N A L Y S I S O F O P P R E S S IO N This work, a n extract from a much longer piece entitled 'Reflections concerning the Causes of Liberty and Social Oppress;.on ' is one of her major corttn"butions to political theory. Sketches for the essay were in pmgress ever since Simone Weil's return from Gennany in 1 932. 1�1any of the ideas contained in it fanned part of a course on Marxism she gave at the miners ' study group sessions in Saint-Etienne. She presented a bn"ef history of science and a history of the struggles against oppression, which she descn"bed as being finally united in Marxism . It has been suggested that work on this paper was the spur which decided her to enter the fnctory and which began to separate her from the political theorists within the revolutionary-syndicalist mo·vement. She herself attached some importance to it and after the outbreak of war, when many of her papers were left behind in her parents ' apart­ ment in the rue Auguste Comte, she wrote to an old fn"e nd, Guindy, who had become a customs inspector and could travel easily between Pan·s and \/ichy, asking him if he would go there and find it for her: there is in Paris in my briefcase a prose piece, very long, typewn"tten, whose title I forget, but it has a quotation from SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY 1 48 Spinoza as an epigraph. It is essentially an analysis ofpolitical and social oppression, its pennanent causes, its mechanism and its presentfonns. It dates from 1934. It too is very pertinent today. It surely is good enough not be lost I think. But I don 't know whether it would be prudent to take it home with you. Read it and evaluate it for yourself . . . I really regret now that I didn 't publish it 0 0 0 The quotation from Spinoza reads: With regard to human affairs, not to laugh, not to cry, not to become indignant, but to understand'. The conclusion to this cn"tique echoes the themes that were to occupy her for the rest of her lzfe, both in the factory and outside it. It seems to be a question, she says, of separating, in present-day civilization, what belongs of nght to man, considered as an individual, and what is of a nature to place weapons in the hands of the collectivity for use against him [. . .} Technique [. . .} ought to be studied [. . .} from an entirely new point of view, which would no longer be that of output, but that of the relation between the worker and his work[. . . .} [My deletions S.M.] The problem is, in short, to know what it is that links oppression in general and each form of oppression in par­ ticular to the system of production ; in other words, to succeed in grasping the mechanism of oppression, in under­ standing by what means it arises, subsists, transforms itself, by what means, perhaps, it might theoretically disappear. This is, to all intents and purposes, a novel question. For centuries past, noble minds have regarded the power of oppressors as constituting a usurpation pure and simple, which one had to try to oppose either by simply expressing a radical disapproval of it, or else by armed force placed at the service of justice . In either case, failure has always been complete ; and never was it more strikingly so than when it took on momentarily the appearance of victory, as happened with the French Revolution, when, after having effectively succeeded in bringing about the disappearance of a certain ANALYSIS OF OPPRESSION 1 49 form of oppression , people stood by, helpless, watching a new oppression immediately being set up in its place. I n his ponderings over this resounding failure, which had come to crown all previous ones, Marx finally came to understand that you cannot abolish oppression so long as the causes which make it inevitable remain, and that these causes reside in the objective - that is to say material conditions of the social system . He consequently elaborated a completely new conception of oppression, no longer con­ sidered as the usurpation of a privilege, but as the organ of a social function . This function is that very one which con­ sists in developing the productive forces, in so far as this development calls for severe efforts and serious hardships ; and Marx and Engels perceived a reciprocal relationship between this development and social oppression . I n the first place, according to them, oppression becomes established only when improvements in production have brought about a division of labour sufficiently advanced for exchange, military command and government to constitute distinct functions ; on the other hand, oppression, once established, stimulates the further development of the pro­ ductive forces, and changes in form as and when this devel­ opment so demands, until the day when, having become a hindrance to it instead of a help, it disappears purely and simply. However brilliant the concrete analyses may be by which Marxists have illustrated this thesis, and although it con­ stitutes an improvement on the naive expressions of indig­ nation which it replaced, one cannot say that it throws light on the mechanism of oppression . It only partially describes its origins ; for why should the division of labour necessarily turn into oppression ? It by no means entitles us to a reason­ able expectation of its ending ; for if Marx believed himself to have shown how the capitalist system finally h inders production, he did not even attempt to prove that, in our day, any other oppressive system would hinder it in like manner. Furthermore, one fails to understand why oppres­ sion should not manage to continue, even after it has become a 1 50 SIMONE WElL - Jll\1 ANTHOLOGY factor of economic regression. Above all, Marx omits to explain why oppression is invincible as long as it is useful, why the oppressed in revolt have never succeeded in found­ ing a non-oppressive society, whether on the basis of the productive forces of their time, or even at the cost of an economic regression which could hardly increase their misery ; and, lastly, he leaves completely in the dark the genera! principles of the mechanism by which a given form of oppression is replaced by another. What is more, not only have Marxists not solved a single one of these problems, but they have not even thought it their duty to formulate them . It has seemed to them that they had sufficiently accounted for social oppression by assuming that it corresponds to a function in the struggle against nature . Even then, they have only really brought out this correspondence in the case of the capitalist system ; but, in any case, to suppose that such a correspondence constitutes an explanation of the phenomenon is to apply unconsciously to social organisms Lamarck's famous principle, as unintel­ ligible as it is convenient, 'the function creates the organ'. Biology only started to be a science on the day when Darwin replaced this principle by the notion of conditions of exist­ ence . The improvement lies in the fact that the function is no longer considered as the cause, but as the result of the organ ­ the only intelligible order ; the part played by cause is hence­ forth attributed only to a blind mechanism, that of heredity combined with accidental variations . Actually, by itself, all this blind mechanism can do is to produce haphazardly anything whatsoever; the adaptation of the organ to the function here enters into play in such a manner as to limit chance by eliminating the non-viable structures, no longer as a mysterious tendency, but as a condition of existence ; and this condition is defined by the relationship of the organism under consideration to its partly inert, partly living environ­ ment, and more especially to similar rival organisms . Adap­ tation is henceforth conceived in regard to living beings as an exterior and no longer an interior necessity. It is clear that this luminous method is not only valid in ANALYSIS OF OPPRESSION 151 biology, but wherever one is confronted by organized struc­ tures which have not been organized by anybody. In order to be able to appeal to science in social matters, we ought to have effected with respect to Marxism an improvement similar to that which Darwin effected with respect to Lamarck. The causes of social evolution must no longer be sought elsewhere than in the daily efforts of men considered as individuals. These efforts are certainly not directed hap­ hazardly ; they depend, in each individual case, on tempera­ ment, education , routine, customs, prejudices, natural or acquired needs, environment, and above all , broadly speak­ ing, human nature, a term which , although difficult to define, is probably not devoid of meaning. But given the almost infinite diversity of individuals, and especially the fact that human nature includes among other things the ability to innovate, to create, to rise above oneself, this warp and woof of incoherent efforts would produce anything whatever in the way of social organization, were it not that chance found itself restricted in this field by the conditions of existence to which every society has to conform on pain of being either subdued or destroyed . The men who submit to these conditions of existence are more often than not unaware of them, for they act not by imposing a definite direction on the efforts of each one, but by rendering in­ effective all efforts made in directions disallowed by them . These conditions of existence are determined in the first place, as in the case of living beings, on the one hand by the natural environment and on the other hand by the exist­ ence, activity and especially competition of other organisms of the same species, that is to say here of other social groups . But still a third factor enters into play, namely, the organization of the natural environment, capital equip­ ment, armaments, methods of work and of warfare ; and this factor occupies a special position owing to the fact that, though it acts upon the form of social organization, it in turn undergoes the latter's reaction upon it . Furthermore, this factor is the only one over which the members of a society can perhaps exercise some control . 152 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY This outline is too abstract to serve as a guide ; but if on the basis of this summary view we could arrive at some concrete analyses, it would at last become possible to for­ mulate the social problem. The enlightened goodwill of men acting in an individual capacity is the only possible principle of social progress ; if social necessities, once clearly perceived, were found to lie outside the range of this good­ will in the same way as those which govern the stars, each man would have nothing more to do but to watch history unfolding as one watches the seasons go by, while doing his best to spare himself and his loved ones the misfortune of being either an instrument or a victim of social oppression. If this is not so, it would be necessary first of all to define by way of an ideal limit the objective conditions that would permit of a social organization absolutely free from oppres­ sion ; then seek out by what means and to what extent the conditions actually given can be transformed so as to bring them nearer to this ideal ; find out what is the least oppres­ sive form of social organization for a body of specific objec­ tive conditions ; and lastly, define in this field the power of action and responsibilities of individuals as such . Only on this condition could political action become something anal­ ogous to a form of work, instead of being, as has been the case hitherto, either a game or a branch of magic . Unfortunately, in order to reach this stage, what is re­ quired is not only searching, rigorous thinking, subjected, so as to avoid all possibility of error, to the most exacting checking, but also historical , technical and scientific investi­ gations of an unparalleled range and precision, and con­ ducted from an entirely new point of view. However, events do not wait ; time will not stop in order to afford us leisure ; the present forces itself urgently on our attention and threatens us with calamities which would bring in their train, amongst many other harrowing misfortunes, the ma­ terial impossibility of studying or writing otherwise than in the service of the oppressors. What are we to do? There would be no point in letting oneself be swept along in the melee by an ill-considered enthusiasm . No one has the ANALYSIS OF OPPRESSION 153 faintest idea o f either the objectives o r the means o f what is still from force of habit called revolutionary action. As for reformism, the principle of the lesser evil on which it is based is certainly eminently reasonable, however discredited it may be through the fault of those who have hitherto made use of i t ; though remember, if it has so far served only as a pretext for capitulation, this is due not to the cowardice of a few leaders, but to an ignorance unfortunately common to all ; for as long as the worst and the best have not been defined in terms of a clearly and concretely conceived ideal , and then the precise margin of possibilities determined, we do not know which is the lesser evil, and consequently we are compelled to accept under this name anything effec­ tively imposed by those who dispose of force , since any existing evil whatever is always less than the possible evils which uncalculating action invariably runs the risk of bring­ ing about. Broadly speaking, blind men such as we are in these days have only the choice between surrender and adventure. And yet we cannot avoid the duty of determin­ ing here and now the attitude to adopt with regard to the present situation . This is why, until we have - if, indeed , such a thing is possible - taken to pieces the social mechan­ ism, it is permissible perhaps to try to outline its principles ; provided it be clearly understood that such a rough sketch rules out any kind of categorical assertion, and aims solely at submitting a few ideas, by way of hypotheses, to the critical examination of honest people. Besides, we are far from being without a guide on the subject. If Marx's system, in its broad outlines, is of little assistance , it is a different matter when it comes to the analyses he was led to make by the concrete study of capitalism, and in which , while be­ lieving that he was limiting himself to describing a system, he probably more than once seized upon the hidden nature of oppression itself. Among all the forms of social organization which history has to show, there are very few which appear to be really free from oppression ; and these few are not very well known. All of them correspond to an extremely low level of production, 1 54 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY so low that the division of labour is pretty well un­ known, except between the sexes, and each family produces little more than its own requirements. It is sufficiently ob­ vious, moreover, that such material conditions necessarily rule out oppression, since each man, compelled to sustain himself personally, is continually at grips with outside nature ; war itself, at this stage, is war of pillage and exter­ mination, not of conquest, because the means of consoli­ dating a conquest and especially of turning it to account are lacking. What is surprising is not that oppression should make its appearance only after higher forms of economy have been reached, but that it should always accompany them. This means, therefore, that as between a completely primitive economy and more highly developed forms of economy there is a difference not only of degree, but also of kind. And , in fact, although from the point of view of consumption there is but a change-over to slightly better conditions, production, which is the decisive factor, is itself transformed in its very essence. This transformation con­ sists at first sight in a progressive emancipation with respect to nature . In completely primitive forms of production hunting, fishing, gathering - human effort appears as a simple reaction to the inexorable pressure continually exer­ cised on man by nature, and that in two ways. To start with , it takes place, to all intents and purposes, under immediate compulsion, under the ever-present spur of natural needs ; and, by an indirect consequence, the action seems to receive its form from nature herself, owing to the important part played therein by an intuition comparable to animal instinct and a patient observation of the most fre­ quent natural phenomena, also owing to the indefinite repetition of methods that have often succeeded without men's knowing why, and which are doubtless regarded as being welcomed by nature with special favour. At this stage1 each man is necessarily free with respect to other men, because he is in direct contact with the conditions of his own existence, and because nothing human interposes itself between them and him ; but, on the other hand, and ANALYSIS OF OPPRESSION 1 55 to the same extent, he is narrowly subjected to nature's dominion, and he shows this clearly enough by deifying her. At higher stages of production, nature's compulsion continues certainly to be exercised, and still pitilessly, but in an apparently less immediate fashion ; it seems to become more and more liberalized and to leave an increasing margin to man's freedom of choice, to his faculty of initiative and decision . Action is no longer tied moment by moment to nature's exigencies ; men learn how to store up reserves on a long-term basis for meeting needs not yet actually fel t ; efforts which can b e only o f indirect usefulness become more and more numerous ; at the same time a systematic co­ ordination in time and in space becomes possible and neces­ sary, and its importance increases continually. In short, man seems to pass by stages, with respect to nature, from servitude to dominion. At the same time nature gradually loses her divine character, and divinity more and more takes on human shape. Unfortunately, this emancipation is only a flattering semblance . I n reality, at these higher stages, human action continues, as a whole, to be nothing but pure obedience to the brutal spur of an immediate necessity ; only, instead of being harried by nature, man is henceforth harried by man. However, it is still the same pressure ex­ erted by nature that continues to make itself felt, although indirectly ; for oppression is exercised by force, and in the long run all force originates in nature. The notion of force is far from simple, and yet it is the first that has to be elucidated in order to formulate the problems of society. Force and oppression - that makes two ; but what needs to be understood above all is that it is not the manner in which use is made of some particular force, but its very nature, which determines whether it is oppressive or not. Marx clearly perceived this in connection with the State ; he understood that this machine for grind­ ing men down , cannot stop grinding as long as it goes on functioning, no matter in whose hands it may be. But this insight has a far more general application . Oppression pro­ ceeds exclusively from objective conditions. The first of 156 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY these is the existence of privileges ; and it is not men's laws or decrees which determine privileges , nor yet titles to property ; it is the very nature of things. Certain circum­ stances, which correspond to stages, no doubt inevitable, in human development, give rise to forces which come between the ordinary man and his own conditions of exist­ ence, between the effort and the fruit of the effort, and which are, inherently, the monopoly of a few, owing to the fact that they cannot be shared among all ; thenceforward these privileged beings, although they depend, in order to live , on the work of others, hold in their hands the fate of the very people on whom they depend, and equality is destroyed . This is what happens to begin with when the religious rites by which man thinks to win nature over to his side, having become too numerous and complicated to be known by all, finally become the secret and consequently the monopoly of a few priests ; the priest then disposes, albeit only through a fiction, of all of nature's powers, and it is in their name that he exercises authority. Nothing essential is changed when this monopoly is no longer made up of rites but of scientific processes, and when those in possession of it are called scientists and technicians instead of priests. Arms, too, give rise to a privilege from the day when, on the one hand, they are sufficiently powerful to render any defence by unarmed against armed men impossible, and , on the other, the handling of them has become sufficiently advanced, and consequently difficult, to require a long apprenticeship and continuous practice. For henceforth the workers are powerless to defend themselves, whereas the warriors, albeit incapable of production, can always take forcible possession of the fruits of other people's labour ; the workers are thus at the mercy of the warriors, and not the other way about. The same thing applies to gold, and more generally to money, as soon as the division of labour is so far developed that no worker can live off his own products without having exchanged at any rate some of them for those of others ; the organization of exchange then becomes ANALYSIS OF OPPRESSION 1 57 necessarily the monopoly of a few specialists who , having money under their control, can both obtain for themselves, in order to live , the products of others' labour, and at the same time deprive the producers of the indispensably necessary. In short, wherever, in the struggle against men or against nature, efforts need to be multiplied and co-ordinated to be effective, co-ordination becomes the monopoly of a few leaders as soon as it reaches a certain degree of complexity, and execution's primary law is then obedience ; this is true both for the management of public affairs and for that of private undertakings . There may be other sources of privi­ lege, but these are the chief ones ; furthermore, except in the case of money, which appears at a given moment of history, all these factors enter into play under all systems of oppression ; what changes is the way in which they are distributed and combined , the degree of concentration of power, and also the more or less closed and consequently more or less mysterious character of each monopoly. Never­ theless, privileges, of themselves, are not sufficient to cause oppression. Inequality could be easily mitigated by the resistance of the weak and the feeling for justice of the strong ; it would not lead to a still harsher form of necessity than that of natural needs themselves, were it not for the intervention of a further factor, namely, the struggle for power. As Marx clearly understood in the case of capitalism, and as a few moralists have perceived in a more general way, power contains a sort of fatality which weighs as pitilessly on those who command as on those who obey ; nay more , it is in so far as it enslaves the former that, through their agency, it presses down upon the latter. The struggle against nature entails certain inescapable necessities which nothing can turn aside, but these necessities contain within themselves their own limits ; nature resists, but she does not defend herself, and where she alone is involved, each situa­ tion presents certain well-defined obstacles which arouse the best in human effort . It is altogether different as soon as 1 58 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY relations between man and man take the place of direct contact between man and nature. The preservation of power is a vital necessity for the powerful , since it is their power which provides their sustenance ; but they have to preserve it both against their rivals and against their in­ feriors, and these latter cannot do otherwise than try to rid themselves of dangerous masters, for, through a vicious circle, the master produces fear in the slave by the very fact that he is afraid of him, and vice versa ; and the same is true as between rival powers. What is more, the two struggles that every man of power has to wage - first against those over whom he rules, secondly against his rivals - are inextricably bound up together and each is all the time rekindling the other. A power, whatever it may be , must always tend towards strengthening itself at home by means of successes gained abroad, for such suc­ cesses provide it with more powerful means of coercion ; besides, the struggle against its rivals rallies behind it its own slaves, who are under the illusion they have a personal interest in the result of the battle. But, in order to obtain from the slaves the obedience and sacrifices indispensable to victory, that power has to make itself more oppressive ; to be in a position to exercise this oppression, it is still more imperatively compelled to turn outwards ; and so on. We can follow out the same chain of events by starting from another link ; show how a given social group, in order to be in a position to defend itself against the outside powers threatening to lay hands on it, must itself submit to an oppressive form of authority ; how the power thus set up, in order to maintain its position, must stir up conflicts with rival powers ; and so on, once again. Thus it is that the most fatal of vicious circles drags the whole society in the wake of its masters in a mad merry-go-round. There are only two ways of breaking the circle, either by abolishing inequality, or else by setting up a stable power, a power such that there exists a balance between those who command and those who obey. It is this second solution that has been sought by all whom we call upholders of ANALYSIS OF OPPRESSION 1 59 order, or at any rate all those among them who have been moved neither by servility nor by ambition ; it was doubt­ less so with the Latin writers who praised 'the immense majesty of the Roman peace' , with Dante, with the re­ actionary school at the beginning of the nineteenth century , with Balzac, and is so today with sincere and thoughtful men of the Right. But this stability of power - objective of those who call themselves realists - shows itself to be a chimera, if one examines it closely, on the same grounds as the anarchists' utopia . Between man and matter, each action, whether successful or not, establishes a balance that can only be upset from out­ side ; for matter is inert. A displaced stone accepts its new position ; the wind consents to guide to her destination the same ship which it would have sent off her course if sails and rudder had not been properly adjusted . But men are essen­ tially active beings and have a faculty of self-determination which they can never renounce , even should they so desire, except on the day when, through death, they drop back into the state of inert matter ; so that every victory won over men contains within itself the germ of a possible defeat, unless it goes as far as extermination . But extermination abolishes power by abolishing its object. Thus there is, in the very essence of power, a fundamental contradiction that pre­ vents it from ever existing in the true sense of the word ; those who are called the masters, ceaselessly compelled to reinforce their power for fear of seeing it snatched away from them , are for ever seeking a dominion essentially impossible to attain ; beautiful illustrations of this search are offered by the infernal torments in Greek mythology. It would be otherwise if one man could possess in h imself a force superior to that of many other men put together ; but such is never the case ; the instruments of power - arms, gold, machines, magical or technical secrets - always exist independently of him who disposes of them, and can be taken up by others. Consequently all power is unstable. Generally speaking, among human beings, since the relationships between rulers and ruled are never fully 1 60 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY acceptable, they always constitute an irremediable disequi­ librium which is continually aggravating itself ; the same is true even in the sphere of private life, where love, for example, destroys all balance in the soul as soon as it seeks to dominate or to be dominated by its object. But here at any rate there is nothing external to prevent reason from returning and putting everything to rights by establishing liberty and equality ; whereas social relationships, in so far as the very methods of labour and of warfare rule out equality, seem to cause madness to weigh down on mankind in the manner of an external fatality. For, owing to the fact that there is never power, but only a race for power, and that there is no term , no limit, no proportion set to this race, neither is there any limit or proportion set to the efforts that it exacts ; those who give themselves up to it, compelled to do always better than their rivals, who in their turn strive to do better than they, must sacrifice not only the existence of the slaves, but their own also and that of their nearest and dearest ; so it is that Agamemnon sacri­ ficing his daughter lives again in the capitalists who, to maintain their privileges, acquiesce lightheartedly in wars that may rob them of their sons. Thus the race for power enslaves everybody, strong and weak alike. Marx saw this clearly with reference to the capitalist system . Rosa Luxemburg used to inveigh against the aspect of 'aimless merry-go-round' presented by the Marxist picture of capitalist accumulation, that picture in which consumption appears as a 'necessary evil' to be re­ duced to the minimum, a mere means for keeping alive those who devote themselves, whether as leaders or as workers, to the supreme object, which is none other than the manufacture of capital equipment, that is to say of the means of production. And yet it is the profound absurdity of this picture which gives it its profound truth ; a truth which extends singularly beyond the framework of the capitalist system. The only characteristic peculiar to this system is that the instruments of industrial production are at the same time the chief weapons in the race for power; AIVALYSIS OF OPPRESSION 161 but always the methods pursued i n the race for power, whatever they may be, bring men under their subjection through the same frenzy and impose themselves on them as absolute ends. It is the reflection of this frenzy that lends an epic grandeur to works such as the Comedie Humaine, Shakespeare's Histon.es , the chansons de geste , or the Iliad. The real subject of the Iliad is the sway exercised by war over the warriors, and, through them, over humanity in general ; none of them knows why each sacrifices himself and all his family to a bloody and aimless war, and that is why, all through the poem, it is the gods who are credited with the mysterious influence which nullifies peace negotia­ tions, continually revives hostilities, and brings together again the contending forces urged by a flash of good sense to abandon the struggle . Thus i n this ancient and wonderful poem there already appears the essential evil besetting humanity, the substi­ tution of means for ends. At times war occupies the fore­ front, at other times the search for wealth, at other times production ; but the evil remains the same. The common run of moralists complain that man is moved by his private interest : would to heaven it were so ! Private interest is a self-centred principle of action, but at the same time re­ stricted, reasonable and incapable of giving rise to un­ limited evils. Whereas, on the other hand, the law of all activities governing social life, except in the case of primi­ tive communities, is that here each one sacrifices human life - in himself and in others - to things which are only means to a better way of living. This sacrifice takes on various forms, but it all comes back to the question of power. Power, by definition, is only a means ; or to put it better, to possess a power is simply to possess means of action which exceed the very limited force that a single individual has at his disposal. But power-seeking, owing to its essential in­ capacity to seize hold of its object, rules out all consideration of an end, and finally comes, through an inevitable reversal , to take the place of all ends . It is this reversal of the relationship between means and end, it is this fundamental 1 62 SIMONE WE/L - AN ANTHOLOGY folly that accounts for all that is senseless and bloody right through history. Human history is simply the history of the servitude which makes men - oppressors and op­ pressed alike - the plaything of the instruments of domi­ nation they themselves have manufactured , and thus re­ duces living humanity to being the chattel of inanimate chattels. Thus it is things, not men, that prescribe the limits and laws governing this giddy race for power. Men's desires are powerless to control it. The masters may well dream of moderation, but they are prohibited from practising this virtue, on pain of defeat, except to a very slight extent ; so that, apart from a few almost miraculous exceptions, such as Marcus Aurelius, they quickly become incapable even of conceiving it. As for the oppressed, their permanent revolt, which is always simmering, though it only breaks out now and then, can operate in such a way as to aggravate the evil as well as to restrict it ; and on the whole it rather constitutes an aggravating factor in that it forces the masters to make their power weigh ever more heavily for fear of losing it. From time to time the oppressed manage to drive out one team of oppressors and to replace it by another, and some­ times even to change the form of oppression ; but as for abolishing oppression itself, that would first mean abol­ ishing the sources of it, abolishing all the monopolies, the magical and technical secrets that give a hold over nature, armaments, money, co-ordination of labour. Even if the oppressed were sufficiently conscious to make up their minds to do so, they could not succeed. It would be con­ demning themselves to immediate enslavement by the social groupings that had not carried out the same change ; and even were this danger to be miraculously averted , it would be condemning themselves to death , for, once men have forgotten the methods of primitive production and have transformed the natural environment into which these fitted, they cannot recover immediate contact with nature . I t follows that, in spite of so many vague desires to put an end to madness and oppression, the concentration of power ANALYSIS OF OPPRESSION 1 63 and the aggravation of its tyrannical character would know no bounds were these not by good fortune found in the nature of things. It behoves us to determine roughly what these bounds can be ; and for this purpose we must keep in mind the fact that, if oppression is a necessity of social life, this necessity has nothing providential about it. It is not because it becomes detrimental to production that op­ pression can come to an end ; the 'revolt of the productive forces' , so naively invoked by Trotsky as a factor in history, is a pure fiction. We should be mistaken likewise in as­ suming that oppression ceases to be ineluctable as soon as the productive forces have been sufficiently developed to ensure welfare and leisure for all . Aristotle admitted that there would no longer be anything to stand in the way of the abolition of slavery if it were possible to have the indispens­ able jobs done by 'mechanical slaves', and when Marx attempted to forecast the future of the human species, all he did was to take up this idea and develop it. It would be true if men were guided by considerations of welfare ; but from the days of the Iliad to our own times, the senseless de­ mands made by the struggle for power have taken away even the leisure for thinking about welfare. The raising of the output of human effort will remain powerless to lighten the load of this effort as long as the social structure implies the reversal of the relationship between means and ends, in other words, as long as the methods of labour and of war­ fare give to a few men a discretionary power over the masses ; for the fatigues and privations that have become unnecessary in the struggle against nature will be absorbed by the war carried on between men for the defence or acquisition of privileges. Once society is divided up into men who command and men who execute, the whole of social life is governed by the struggle for power, and the struggle for subsistence only enters in as one factor, in­ dispensable to be sure, of the former. The Marxist view, according to which social existence is determined by the relations between man and nature estab­ lished by production , certainly remains the only sound 1 64 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY basis for any historical investigation ; only these relations must be considered first of all in terms of the problem of power, the means of subsistence forming simply one of the data of this problem . This order seems absurd , but it merely reflects the essential absurdity lying at the very heart of social life . A scientific study of history would thus be a study of the actions and reactions which are perpetually arising between the organization of power and the methods of production ; for although power depends on the material conditions of life, it never ceases to transform these con­ ditions themselves. Such a study goes very far beyond our possibilities at the moment ; but before grappling with the infinite complexity of the facts, it is useful to make an abstract diagram of this interplay of actions and reactions, rather in the same way as astronomers have had to invent an imaginary celestial sphere so as to find their way about among the movements and positions of the stars. We must try first of all to draw up a list of the inevitable necessities which limit all species of power. In the first place, any sort of power relies upon instruments which have in each situation a given scope. Thus you do not command in the same way, by means of soldiers armed with bows and arrows, spears and swords as you do by means of aeroplanes and incendiary bombs ; the power of gold depends on the role played by exchanges in economic life ; that of technical secrets is measured by the difference between what you can accomplish with their aid and what you can accomplish without them ; and so on . As a matter of fact, one must always include in this balance-sheet the subterfuges by which the powerful obtain through persuasion what they are totally unable to obtain by force, either by placing the oppressed in a situation such that they have or think they have an immediate interest in doing what is asked of them, or by inspiring them with a fanaticism calculated to make them accept any and every sacrifice. Secondly, since the power that a human being really exercises extends only to what is effectively under his control, power is always run­ ning up against the actual limits of the controlling faculty, ANALYSIS OF OPPRESSION 1 65 and these are extremely narrow. For no single mind can encompass a whole mass of ideas at once ; no man can be in several places at once ; and for master and slave alike there are never more than twenty-four hours in a day. Collabor­ ation apparently constitutes a remedy for this drawback ; but as it is never absolutely free from rivalry, it gives rise to infinite complications. The faculties of examining, com­ paring, weighing, deciding, combining are essentially in­ dividual, and consequently the same thing applies also to power, whose exercise is inseparable from these faculties ; collective power is a fiction , at any rate in the final analysis. As for the number of interests that can come under the control of one single man, that depends to a very large extent on individual factors such as breadth and quickness of intelligence, capacity for work, firmness of character ; but it also depends on the objective conditions of the control exercised, more or less rapid methods of transport and communication, simplicity or otherwise of the machinery of power. Lastly, the exercise of any form of power is subject to the existence of a surplus in the production of commod­ ities, and a sufficiently large surplus so that all those en­ gaged, whether as masters or as slaves, in the struggle for power, may be able to live. Obviously, the extent of such surplus depends on the methods of production, and con­ sequently also on the social organization . Here, therefore, are three factors that enable one to conceive political and social power as constituting at each moment something analogous to a measurable force. However, in order to complete the picture, one must bear in mind that the men who find themselves in relationship, whether as masters or as slaves, with the phenomenon of power are unconscious of this analogy. The powerful , be they priests, military leaders, kings or capitalists, always believe that they command by divine right ; and those who are under them feel themselves crushed by a power which seems to them either divine or diabolical , but in any case supernatural. Every oppressive society is cemented by this religion of power, which falsifies all social relations by enabling the powerful to command 1 66 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY over and above what they are able to impose ; it is only otherwise in times of popular agitation, times when, on the contrary , all - rebellious slaves and threatened masters alike - forget how heavy and how solid the chains of oppression are . Thus a scientific study of history ought to begin by analysing the reactions brought to bear at each moment by power on the conditions which assign to it objectively its limits ; and a hypothetical sketch of the play of these reac­ tions is indispensable in order to conduct such an analysis, far too difficult, incidentally, considering our present pos­ sibilities. Some of these reactions are conscious and willed . Every power consciously strives, in proportion to the means at its disposal - a proportion determined by the social organization - to improve production and official control within its own sphere ; history offers many an example of this, from the Pharaohs down to the present day, and it is on this that the notion of enlightened despotism is founded . On the other hand, every power strives also, and again consciously, to destroy among its competitors the means whereby to produce and govern, and is the object on their part of a similar attempt . Thus the struggle for power is at the same time constructive and destructive, and brings about economic progress or decadence, depending on which­ ever aspect wins the day ; and it is clear that in a given civilization destruction will take place to an extent all the greater the more difficult it is for a power to expand without coming up against rival powers approximately as strong as itself. But the indirect consequences of the exercise of power are far more important than the conscious efforts of the wielders of power. Every power, from the mere fact that it is exercised, extends to the farthest possible limit the social relations on which it is based ; thus military power multiplies wars, commercial capital multiplies exchanges. Now it sometimes happens, through a sort of providential accident, that this extension gives rise, by some mechanism or other, to new resources that make a new extension possible, and so on, ANALYSIS OF OPPRESSION 167 more or less in the same way as food strengthens living beings in full process of growth and enables them thus to win still more food so as to acquire still greater strength. All regimes provide examples of such providential accidents ; for without them no form of power could endure, and consequently those powers that benefit from them are the only ones to subsist . Thus war enabled the Romans to carry off slaves, that is to say workers in the prime of life , whom others had had to provide for during childhood ; the profit derived from slave labour made it possible to reinforce the army, and the stronger army undertook more important wars which brought in new and bigger consignments of slaves as booty. Similarly, the roads which the Romans built for military purposes later facilitated the government and exploitation of the conquered provinces, and thus con­ tributed towards storing up resources for future wars. If we turn now to modern times, we see, for example, that the extension of exchanges has brought about a greater division of labour, which in its turn has made a wider circulation of commodities indispensable ; furthermore, the increased productivity which has resulted from this has furnished new resources that have been able to transform themselves into commercial and industrial capital. As far as big industry is concerned , it is clear that each important advance in mechanization has created at the same time resources, instruments and a stimulus towards a further advance. Similarly, it was the technique of big industry which came to provide the means of control and informa­ tion indispensable to the centralized economy that is the inevitable outcome of big industry, such as the telegraph , the telephone, the daily press. The same may b e said with regard to the means of transport. One could find all through history an immense number of similar examples, bearing on the widest and the narrowest aspects of social life. One may define the growth of a system by the fact that all it needs to do is to function in order to create new resources enabling it to function on a larger scale . This phenomenon of automatic development is so striking 1 68 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY that one would be tempted to imagine that a happily constituted system, if one may so express it, would go on enduring and progressing endlessly. That is exactly what the nineteenth century, socialists included, imagined with regard to the system of big industry. But if it is easy to imagine in a vague way an oppressive system that would never fall into decadence, it is no longer the same if one wants to conceive clearly and concretely the indefinite ex­ tension of a specific power. If it could extend endlessly its means of control , it would tend indefinitely towards a limit which would be something like ubiquity ; if it could extend its resources endlessly, everything would be as though sur­ rounding nature were evolving gradually towards that un­ qualified abundance from which Adam and Eve benefited in the earthly paradise ; and, finally, if it could extend indefi­ nitely the range of its own instruments - whether it be a question of arms, gold, technical secrets, machines or any­ thing else - it would tend towards abolishing that correla­ tion which, by indissolubly linking together the notions of master and of slave, establishes between master and slave a relationship of mutual dependence. One cannot prove that all this is impossible ; but one must assume that it is impossible, or else decide to think of human history as a fairy-tale. In general, one can only regard the world in which we live as subject to laws if one admits that every phenomenon in it is limited ; and it is the same for the phenomenon of power, as Plato had under­ stood . If we want to consider power as a conceivable pheno­ menon, we must think that it can extend the foundations on which it rests up to a certain point only, after which it comes up, as it were, against an impassable wall . But even so it is not in a position to stop ; the spur of competition forces it to go ever farther and farther, that is to say to go beyond the limits within which it can be effectively exer­ cised . It extends beyond what it is able to control ; it com­ mands over and above what it can impose ; it spends in excess of its own resources. Such is the internal contradic­ tion which every oppressive system carries within itself like ANALYSIS OF OPPRESSION 1 69 a seed of death ; it is made up of the opposition between the necessarily limited character of the mate!ial bases of power and the necessarily unlimited character of the race for power considered as relationship between men. For as soon as a power goes beyond the limits assigned to it by the nature of things, it narrows down the bases on which it rests, renders these limits themselves narrower and narrower. By spreading beyond what it is able to control, it breeds a parasitism, a waste, a confusion which, once they have appeared, increase automatically. By attempting to command where actually it is not in a position to compel obedience, it provokes reactions which it can neither foresee nor deal with. Finally, by wishing to spread the exploitation of the oppressed beyond what the objective resources make possible, it exhausts these resources themselves ; this is doubtless what is meant by the ancient and popular tale of the goose with the golden eggs. Whatever may be the sources from whence the exploiters draw the material goods which they appropriate, a day arrives when such and such a method of development, which was at first, as it went on spreading, more and more productive, finally becomes, on the other hand , increasingly costly . That is how the Roman army, which had first of all brought wealth to Rome, ended by ruining it ; that is how the knights of the Middle Ages, whose battles had first of all brought a relative security to the peasants, who found themselves to a certain extent protected against acts of brigandage, ended in the course of their interminable wars by laying waste the countryside which fed them ; and it certainly seems as though capitalism is passing through a phase of this kind . Once more, it cannot be proved that it must always be so ; but it has to be assumed, unless the possibility of inexhaustible resources is also assumed . Thus it is the nature itself of things which constitutes that justice-dealing divinity the Greeks wor­ shipped under the name of Nemesis, and which punishes excess. When a specific form of domination finds itself thus arrested in its development and faced with decadence , it 1 70 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY does not follow that it begins to disappear progressively ; sometimes it is then, on the contrary, that it becomes most harshly oppressive, that it crushes human beings under its weight, that it grinds down body, heart and spirit without mercy. However, since everyone begins little by little to feel the lack of the resources required by some to maintain their supremacy, by others to live, a time comes when, on every hand, there is a feverish search for expedients. There is no reason why such a search should not remain fruitless ; and in that case the regime can only end by collapsing for want of the means of subsistence and being replaced , not by another and better organized regime, but by a disorder, a poverty, a primitive condition of existence which continue until some new factor or other gives rise to new relation­ ships of force. If it happens otherwise, if the search for new material resources is successful, new patterns of social life arise and a change of regime begins to form slowly and , as it were, subterraneously. Subterraneously, because these new forms can only develop in so far as they are compatible with the established order and do not represent, in appear­ ance at any rate, any danger for the powers that be ; other­ wise nothing could prevent these powers from destroying them, as long as they remain the stronger. For the new social patterns to triumph over the old, this continued development must already have brought them to play effec­ tively a more important role in the functioning of the social organism ; in other words, they must have given rise to more powerful forces than those at the disposal of the official authorities. Thus there is never really any break in continuity, not even when the change of regime seems to be the result of a bloody struggle ; for all that victory then does is to sanction forces that, even before the struggle, were the decisive factor in the life of the community, social patterns that had long since begun gradually to replace those on which the declining regime rested. So it was that, under the Roman Empire, the barbarians had begun to occupy the most important posts, the army was disintegrating little by little into armed bands led by adventurers, and the system ANALYSIS OF OPPRESSION 171 of military colonies gradually replaced slavery b y serfdom ­ all this long before the great invasions. Similarly, the French bourgeoisie did not by any means wait until 1789 to get the better of the nobility. The Russian Revolution, thanks to a singular conjunction of circumstances, certainly seemed to give rise to something entirely new ; but the truth is that the privileges it abolished had not for a long time rested on any social foundation other than tradition ; that the institutions arising out of the insurrection did not per­ haps effectively function for as long as a single morning ; and that the real forces, namely big industry, the police, the army, the bureaucracy, far from being smashed by the Revolution, attained, thanks to it, a power unknown in other countries. Generally speaking, the sudden reversal of the relation­ ship between forces which is what we usually understand by the term 'revolution' is not only a phenomenon unknown in history, but furthermore, if we examine it closely, some­ thing literally inconceivable, for it would be a victory of weakness over force, the equivalent of a balance whose lighter scale were to go down . What history offers us is slow transformations of regimes, in which the bloody events to which we give the name 'revolutions' play a very secondary role , and from which they may even be absent ; such is the case when the social class which ruled in the name of the old relationships of force manages to keep a part of the power under cover of the new relationships, and the history of England supplies an example. But whatever may be the patterns taken by social transformations, all one finds, if one tries to lay bare the mechanism, is a dreary play of blind forces that unite together or clash, that progress or decline, that replace each other, without ever ceasing to grind be­ neath them the unfortunate race of human beings. At first sight there seems to be no weak spot in this sinister mesh of circumstances through which an attempt at deliverance might find its way. But it is not from such a vague, abstract and miserably hasty sketch as this that one can claim to draw any conclusion. 1 72 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY We must pose once again the fundamental problem, namely, what constitutes the bond which seems hitherto to have united social oppression and progress in the relations between man and nature ? If one considers human develop­ ment as a whole up to our own time, if, above all , one contrasts primitive tribes, organized practically without in­ equality, with our present-day civilization, it seems as if man cannot manage to lighten the yoke imposed by natural necessities without an equal increase in the weight of that imposed by social oppression, as though by the play of a mysterious equilibrium. And even, what is stranger still, it would seem that if, in fact, the human collectivity has to a large extent freed itself from the crushing burden which the gigantic forces of nature place on frail humanity, it has, on the other hand, taken in some sort nature's place to the point of crushing the individual in a similar manner. What makes primitive man a slave ? The fact that he hardly orders his own activity at all ; he is the plaything of need, which dictates each of his movements or very nearly, and harries him with its relentless spur ; and his actions are regulated not by his own intelligence, but by the customs and caprices - both equally incomprehensible - of a nature that he can but worship with blind submission. If we con­ sider simply the collectivity, men seem nowadays to have raised themselves to a condition that is diametrically the opposite of that servile state. Hardly a single one of their tasks constitutes a mere response to the imperative impul­ sion of need ; work is accomplished in such a way as to take charge of nature and to organize her so that needs can be satisfied . Humanity no longer believes itself to be in the presence of capricious divinities whose good graces must be won over ; it knows that it has merely to handle inert matter, and acquits itself of this task by methodically following out clearly conceived laws. At last we seem to have reached that epoch predicted by Descartes when men would use 'the force and actions of fire, water, air, the stars and all the other bodies' in the same way as they do the artisans' tools, and would thus make themselves masters of nature. But, by ANALYSIS OF OPPRESSION 1 73 a strange inversion, this collective dominion transforms itself into servitude as soon as one descends to the scale of the individual , and into a servitude fairly closely resembling that associated with primitive conditions of existence. The efforts of the modern worker are imposed on him by a constraint as brutal, as pitiless and which holds him in as tight a grip as hunger does the primitive hunter. From the time of that primitive hunter up to that of the worker in our large factories, passing by way of the Egyptian workers driven by the lash, the slaves of antiquity, the serfs of the Middle Ages constantly threatened by the seigneurial sword, men have never ceased to be goaded to work by some outside force and on pain of almost immediate death . And as for the sequence of movements in work, that, too , is often imposed from outside on our workers, exactly as in the case of primitive men, and is as mysterious for the ones as it was for the others ; what is more, in this respect, the constraint is in certain cases incomparably more brutal to­ day than it has ever been . However tied and bound a primitive man was to routine and blind gropings, he could at least try to think things out, to combine and innovate at his own risk, a liberty which is absolutely denied to a worker engaged in a production line. Lastly, if humanity appears to have reached the stage of controlling those forces of nature which, however, in Spinoza's words, ' infinitely surpass those of mankind' - and that in almost as sovereign a fashion as a rider controls his horse - that victory does not belong to men taken individually ; only the largest collectivi­ ties are in a position to handle 'the force and actions of fire, water, air . . . and all the other bodies that surround us' ; as for the members of these collectivities, both oppressors and oppressed are alike subjected to the implacable demand of the struggle for power. Thus, in spite of progress, man has not emerged from the servile condition in which he found himself when he was handed over weak and naked to all the blind forces that make up the universe ; it is merely that the power which keeps him on his knees has been as it were transferred from 1 74 SIMONE WEIL - AN ANTHOLOGY inert matter to the human society of which he is a member. That is why it is this society which is imposed on his worship through all the various forms that religious feeling takes in turn . Hence the social question poses itself in a fairly clear manner ; the mechanism of this transfer must be examined ; we must try to find out why man has had to pay this price for his power over nature ; form an idea of what would constitute the least unhappy position for him to be in, that is to say the one in which he would be the least enslaved to the twin domination of nature and society ; and lastly, discern what roads can lead towards such a position, and what instruments present-day civilization could place in men's hands if they aspired to transform their lives in this way. We accept material progress too easily as a gift of the gods, as something which goes without saying ; we must look fairly and squarely at the conditions at the cost of which it takes place . Primitive life is something easy to understand ; man is spurred on by hunger, or at any rate by the anguished thought that he will soon go hungry, and he sets off in search of food ; he shivers in the cold, or at any rate at the thought that he will soon feel cold, and he goes in search of heat-creating or heat-preserving materials ; and so on. As for the way in which to set about the matter, this is given him in the first place by the habit acquired in child­ hood of imitating his seniors, and also as a result of the habits which he has given himself in the course of innumer­ able tentative efforts, by repeating those methods which have succeeded ; when caught off his guard, he continues to proceed by trial and error, spurred on as he is to act by a sharp urge which never leaves him a moment's peace. I n all this process, man has only to yield to his own nature, not master it. On the other hand, as soon as we pass to a more advanced stage of civilization, everything becomes miraculous. Men are then found laying by things that are good to consume, desirable things, which they nevertheless go without. They are found giving up to a large extent the search for food, ANALYSIS OF OPPRESSION 1 75 warmth, etc . , and spending the best part of their energy on apparently unprofitable labours. As a matter of fact, most of these labours, far from being unprofitable, are infinitely more profitable than the efforts of primitive man , for they result in an organization of outside nature in a manner favourable to human existence ; but this efficacy is indirect and often separated from the actual effort by so many intermediaries that the mind has difficulty in covering them ; it is a long-term efficacy, often so long-term that it is only future generations which will benefit from it ; while , on the other hand, the utter fatigue, physical pains and dan­ gers connected with these labours are felt immediately, and all the time. Now, everybody knows from his own experi­ ence how unusual it is for an abstract idea having a long­ term utility to triumph over present pains, needs and desires. It must, however, do so in the matter of social existence , on pain of a regression to a primitive form of life. But what is more miraculous still is the co-ordination of labour. Any reasonably high level of production presup­ poses a more or less extensive co-operation ; and co­ operation shows itself in the fact that the efforts of each one have meaning and efficacy only through their relationship to and exact correspondence with the efforts of all the rest, in such a way that all the efforts together form one single collective piece of work. In other words, the movements of several men must be combined according to the manner in which the movements of a single man are combined. But how can this be done ? A combination can only take place if it is intellectually conceived ; while a relationship is never formed except within one mind. The number Z thought of by one man cannot be added to the number Z thought of by another man so as to make up the number 4 ; similarly, the idea that one of the co-operators has of the partial work he is carrying out cannot be combined with the idea that each of the others has of his respective task so as to form a coherent piece of work. Several human minds cannot become united in one collective mind , and the expressions 'collective soul', 'collective thought', so commonly employed nowadays, are 1 76 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY altogether devoid of meaning. Consequently, for the efforts of several to be combined, they all need to be directed by one and the same mind, as the famous line in Faust ex­ presses it : 'One mind is enough for a thousand hands. ' In the egalitarian organization of primitive tribes, it i s not possible to solve a single one of these problems, neither that of privation, nor that of incentive to effort, nor that of co­ ordination of labour ; on the other hand, social oppression provides an immediate solution, by creating, to put it broadly, two categories of men - those who command and those who obey. The leader co-ordinates without difficulty the efforts of those who are under his orders ; he has no temptation to overcome in order to reduce them to what is strictly necessary ; and as for the stimulus to effort, an oppressive organization is admirably equipped for driving men beyond the limit of their strength, some being whipped by ambition, others, in Homer's words, 'under the goad of a harsh necessity'. The results are often extraordinary when the division between social categories is deep enough for those who decide what work shall be done never to be exposed to feeling or even knowing about the exhausting fatigue, the pains and the dangers of it, while those who do it and suffer have no choice, being continually under the sway of a more or less disguised menace of death. Thus it is that man escapes to a certain extent from the caprices of blind nature only by handing himself over to the no less blind caprices of the struggle for power. This is never truer than when man reaches - as in our case - a technical development suffi­ ciently advanced to give him the mastery over the forces of nature ; for, in order that this may be so, co-operation has to take place on such a vast scale that the leaders find they have to deal with a mass of affairs which lie utterly beyond their capacity to control. As a result, humanity finds itself as much the plaything of the forces of nature, in the new form that technical progress has given them, as it ever was in primitive times ; we have had, are having, and will continue to have bitter experience of this. As for attempts to preserve Alv'ALYSIS OF OPPRESSION 1 77 technique while shaking off oppression, they at once pro­ voke such laziness and such confusion that those who have engaged in them are more often than not obliged to place themselves again almost immediately under the yoke ; the experiment was tried out on a small scale in the producers' co-operatives, on a vast scale at the time of the Russian Revolution . It would seem that man is born a slave, and that servitude is his natural condition . From ' Reflections concerning the Causes of Liberty and Social Oppres­ sion' in Oppression and Liberty , translated by Arthur Wills and John Petrie, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London 1 958. THE MY S TI C I SM O F WORK he secret of the human condition is that there is no T equilibrium between man and the surrounding forces of nature, which infinitely exceed him when in inaction ; there is only equilibrium in action by which man recreates his own life through work. Man's greatness is always to recreate his life, to recreate what is given to him, to fashion that very thing which he undergoes. Through work he produces his own natural existence. Through science he recreates the universe by means of symbols. Through art he recreates the alliance between his body and his soul (cf. the speech of Eupalinos) . It is to be noticed that each of these three things is something poor, empty and vain taken by itself and not in relation to the two others. Union of the three : a working people's culture (that will not be just yet) . . . Plato himself is only a forerunner. The Greeks knew about art and sport, but not about work. The master is the slave of the slave in the sense that the slave makes the master. Two tasks : To individualize machinery. THE Jl!fYSTICISM OF WORK 1 79 To individualize science (popularization, a people's university on the Socratic model for the study of the elements of the various trades) . Manual work. Why has there never been a mystic, workman or peasant, to write on the use to be made of disgust for work ? Our souls tly from this disgust which is so often there, ever threatening, and try to hide it from themselves by reacting vegetatively. There is mortal danger in admitting it to ourselves. This is the source of the falsehood peculiar to the working classes. (There is a falsehood peculiar to each level . ) This disgust i s the burdensomeness o f time. To acknowledge it to ourselves without giving way under it makes us mount upwards. Disgust in all its forms is one of the most precious trials sent to man as a ladder by which to rise. I have a very large share of this favour. We have to turn all our disgust into a disgust for ourselves . Monotony is the most beautiful or the most atrocious thing. The most beautiful if it is a reflection of eternity - the most atrocious if it is the sign of an unvarying perpetuity . It is time surpassed or time sterilized . The circle is the symbol of monotony which is beautiful, the swinging of a pendulum of monotony which is atrocious. The spirituality of work. Work makes us experience in the most exhausting manner the phenomenon of finality rebounding like a ball ; to work in order to eat, to eat in order to work. If we regard one of the two as an end, or the one and the other taken separately, we are lost. Only the cycle contains the truth. A squirrel turning in its cage and the rotation of the celestial sphere - extreme misery and extreme grandeur. It is when man sees himself as a squirrel turning round 180 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY and round in a circular cage that, if he does not lie to himself, he is close to salvation. The great hardship in manual work is that we are compelled to expend our efforts for such long hours simply in order to exist. The slave is he to whom no good is proposed as the object of his labour except mere existence. Accordingly he must either be detached or fall to the vegetative level. No terrestial finality separates the workers from God. They alone are so situated . All other conditions imply special aims which form a screen between man and pure good. But for them no such screen exists. They have nothing superfluous of which they have to strip themselves. To strive from necessity and not for some good - driven not drawn - in order to maintain our existence just as it is - that is always slavery. In this sense the slavery of manual workers is irreducible. Effort without finality . It is terrible - or the most beautiful thing of all - if it is finality without an end. The beautiful alone enables us to be satisfied by that which is. Workers need poetry more than bread . They need that their life should be a poem. They need some light from eternity. Religion alone can be the source of such poetry. It is not religion but revolution which is the opium of the people. Deprivation of this poetry explains all forms of demoralization. Slavery is work without any light from eternity, without poetry, without religion . May the eternal light give, not a reason for living and THE JVfYSTICISM OF WORK 181 working, but a sense of completeness which makes the search for any such reason unnecessary. Failing that, the only incentives are fear and gain - fear, which implies the oppression of the people ; gain, which implies the corruption of the people . Manual labour. Time entering into the body. Through work man turns himself into matter, as Christ does through the Eucharist. Work is like a death. We have to pass through death . We have to be killed - to endure the weight of the world. When the universe is weighing upon the back of a human creature, what is there to be surprised at if it hurts him ? Work is like a death if it is without an incentive. We have to act, renouncing the fruits of action. To work - if we are worn out it means that we are becoming submissive to time as matter is. Thought is forced to pass from one instant to the next without laying hold of the past or the future. That is what it means to obey. Joys parallel to fatigue : tangible joys, eating, resting, the pleasures of Sunday . . . but not money. No poetry concerning the people is authentic if fatigue does not figure in it, and the hunger and thirst which come from fatigue. From Gravity and Grace, translated b y Emma Craufurd, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1 952. Originally published as La Pesanteur et Ia Grace, Pion, Paris, 1 947 . THE ILIAD or THE POEM O F FOR C E This was wn"tten dun.ng the first year of the war and begun at the same time as an essay on the ongins of Hitlerism. A fundamental mistake, as she saw it, was to consider a particular people, epoch or individual as essentially bar­ barous or evil. She said it was dangerously easy to dismiss Hitler as an unusual phenomenon existing outside 'nonnal' society and with which civilized people have to cope only once in a while. No particular class is predestined as the one and only bearer of civilization. Not class but force was the key to history. 'I believe, ' she said, 'that the concept offorce must be made central in any attempt to think clearly about human relations just as the concept of relation is central to mathematics. ' It first appeared in the only important literary magazine published in the free zone at the time, the Cahiers du Sud, and it was through her association with the Cahiers that she was to meet groups interested in Catharism: 'the last living expression in Europe ofpre-Roman antiquity. ' The essay, which she was oblzged to sign with an anagram of her name, Emile Novis, marks a turning point in her thinking. It was from then on, while living in Marseille, that she came to think and wn.te increasingly on reli'gion and religious subjects. THE I L I AD or THE POEM OF FORCE 183 Through her contacts with these groups Simone Wei! was put in touch with a Resistance network. In the hope that they would be able to get her to England, she attended some of their meetings. Evidently there had been a traitor amongst them since early one morning the police came to interview her and to search the apartment. Several times she was summoned to the police station and several times threatened with imprisonment. She was not in the least bit afraid. Wn'ting to Andre, now already in Amen'ca, she de­ scribes her conversations with 'Oscar', their code name for the police. ' . . . He was bizarre. Now he was polite, now agreeable and now ang1y in quick succession, but above all terribly lazy and not very conscientious. He spoke of invit­ ing me to his house for a rather prolonged stay, but after that it never came up again and I really believe he forgot all about it . . . ' The true hero, the true subject, the centre of the Iliad is force . Force employed by man, force that enslaves man, force before which man's flesh shrinks away. I n this work, at all times, the human spirit is shown as modified by its relations with force, as swept away, blinded, by the very force it imagined it could handle, as deformed by the weight of the force it submits to . For those dreamers who con­ sidered that force, thanks to progress, would soon be a thing of the past, the Iliad could appear as an historical document ; for others, whose powers of recognition are more acute and who perceive force, today as yesterday, at the very centre of human history, the Iliad is the purest and the loveliest of mirrors. To define force - it is that x that turns anybody who is subjected to it into a thing. Exercised to the limit , it turns man into a thing in the most literal sense : it makes a corpse out of him. Somebody was here, and the next minute there is nobody here at all ; this is a spectacle the Iliad never wearies of showing us : 1 84 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY . . . the horses Rattled the empty chariots through the files of battle, Longing for their noble drivers. But they on the ground Lay, dearer to the vultures than to their wives. T h e hero becomes a thing dragged behind a chariot in the dust : All around, his black hair Was spread ; in the dust his whole head lay, That once-charming head ; now Zeus had let his enemtes D efile it on his native soil. The bitterness of such a spectacle is offered us absolutely undi:uted . No comforting fiction intervenes ; no consoling prospect of immortality ; and on the hero's head no washed­ out halo of patriotism descends. H is soul, fleeing his limbs, passed to Hades, Mourning its fate, forsaking its youth and its vigour. Still more poignant - so painful is the contrast - is the sudden evocation, as quickly rubbed out, of another world : the faraway, precarious, touching world of peace, of the family, the world in which each man counts more than anything else to those about him. She ordered her bright-haired maids in the palace To place on the fire a large tripod, preparing A hot bath for Hector, returning from battle. Foolish woman ! Already he lay, far from hot baths, Slain by grey-eyed Athena, who guided Achilles' arm. Far from hot baths he was indeed, poor man. And not he alone. Nearly all the Iliad takes place far from hot baths. N early all of human life, then and now, takes place far from hot baths. H ere we see force in its grossest and most summary form - the force that kills. How much more varied in its pro­ cesses, how much more surprising in its effects is the other THE I LIAD or THE POEM OF FORCE 185 force, the force that does not kill, i . e . , that does not kill just yet. It will surely kill , it will possibly kill, or perhaps it merely hangs, poised and ready, over the head of the crea­ ture it can kill , at any moment , which is to say at every moment. In whatever aspect, its effect is the same : it turns a man into a stone. From its first property (the ability to turn a human being into a thing by the simple method of killing him) flows another, quite prodigious too in its own way, the ability to turn a human being into a thing while he is still alive . He is alive ; he has a soul ; and yet - he is a thing. An extraordinary entity this - a thing that has a soul. And as for the soul, what an extraordinary house it finds itself in ! Who can say what it costs it, moment by moment, to accommodate itself to this residence, how much writhing and bending, folding and pleating are required of it? It was not made to live inside a thing ; if it does so, under pressure of necessity, there is not a single element of its nature to which violence is not done . A man stands disarmed and naked with a weapon point­ ing at him ; this person becomes a corpse before anybody or anything touches him. Just a minute ago, he was thinking, acting, hoping : Motionless , he pondered. And the other drew near, Terrified , anxious to touch his knees, hoping in his heart To escape evil death and black destiny . . . With one hand he clasped , suppliant, his knees, While the other clung to the sharp spear, not letting go . . . Soon, however, he grasps the fact that the weapon which is pointing at him will not be diverted ; and now, still breath­ ing, he is simply matter ; still thinking, he can think no longer : Thus spoke the brilliant son of Priam In begging words. But he heard a harsh reply : He spoke. And the other's knees and heart failed him. 1 86 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY D ropping his spear, he knelt down, holding out his arms. Achilles, drawing his sharp sword, struck Through the neck and breastbone. The two-edged sword Sunk home its full length . The other, face down Lay still , and the black blood ran out, wetting the ground. · If a stranger, completely disabled, disarmed, strength less, throws himself on the mercy of a warrior, he is not by this very act, condemned to death ; but a moment of impatience on the warrior's part will suffice to relieve him of his life . I n any case, his flesh has lost that very important property which in the laboratory distinguishes living flesh from dead, the galvanic response. If you give a frog's leg an electric shock, it twitches. If you confront a human being with the touch or sight of something horrible or terrifying, this bundle of muscles, nerves, and flesh likewise twitches. Alone of all living things, the suppliant we have just de­ scribed neither quivers nor trembles. He has lost the right to do so . As his lips advance to touch the object that is for him of all things most charged with horror, they do not draw back on his teeth - they cannot : No one saw great Priam enter. He stopped , Clasped the knees of Achilles, kissed his hands, Those terrible man-killing hands that had slaughtered so many of his sons. The sight of a human being pushed to such an extreme of suffering chills us like the sight of a dead body : As when harsh misfortune strikes a man if in his own country, He has killed a man , and arrives at last at someone else's door, The door of a rich man ; a shudder seizes those who see him. So Achilles shuddered to see divine Priam ; THE I LI AD or THE POEM OF FORCE 1 87 The others shuddered too, looking one at the other. But this feeling lasts only a moment. Soon the very presence of the suffering creature is forgotten : He spoke. The other, remembering his own father, longed to weep ; Taking the old man's arm , he pushed him away. Both were remembering. Thinking of Hector, killer of men, Priam wept, abased at the feet of Achilles. But Achilles wept, now for his father, Now for Patroclus. And their sobs resounded through the house. It was not insensibility that made Achilles with a single movement of his hand push away the old man who had been clinging to his knees ; Priam's words, recalling his own old father, had moved him to tears. It was merely a question of his being as free in his attitudes and movements as if, clasping his knees, there were not a suppliant but an inert object. Anybody who is in our vicinity exercises a certain power over us by his very presence, and a power that belongs to him alone, that is, the power of halting, repres­ sing, modifying each movement that our body sketches out. If we step aside for a passer-by on the road, it is not the same thing as stepping aside to avoid a billboard ; alone in our rooms, we get up, walk about, sit down again quite differently from the way we do when we have a visitor. B ut this indefinable influence that the presence of another human being has on us is not exercised by men whom a moment of impatience can deprive of life, who can die before even thought has a chance to pass sentence on them. In their presence, people move about as if they were not there ; they, on their side, running the risk of being reduced to nothing in a single instant, imitate nothingness in their own persons. Pushed, they fall . Fallen, they lie where they are, unless chance gives somebody the idea of raising them up again. But supposing that at long last they have been 1 88 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY picked up, honoured with cordial remarks, they still do not venture to take this resurrection seriously ; they dare not express a wish lest an irritated voice return them forever to silence : He spoke ; the old man trembled and obeyed. At least a suppliant, once his prayer is answered, becomes a human being again, like everybody else. But there are other, more unfortunate creatures who have become things for the rest of their lives. Their days hold no pastimes, no free spaces, no room in them for any impulse of their own. It is not that their life is harder than other men's nor that they occupy a lower place in the social hierarchy ; no, they are another human species, a compromise between a man and a corpse. The idea of a person's being a thing is a logical contradiction . Yet what is impossible in logic becomes true in life, and the contradiction lodged within the soul tears it to shreds. This thing is constantly aspiring to be a man or a woman, and never achieving it - here, surely, is death but death strung out over a whole lifetime ; here, surely, is life, but life that death congeals before abolishing. This strange fate awaits the virgin, the priest's daughter : I will not give her up. Sooner shall old age come upon her In our house in Argos, far from her native land, Tending the loom and sharing my bed . It awaits the young wife, the young mother, the prince's bride : And perhaps one day, in Argos, you will weave cloth for another, And the Messeian or Hyperian water you will fetch, Much against your will, yielding to a harsh necessity. It awaits the baby, heir to the royal sceptre : Soon they will be carried off in the hollow ships, I with them. And you, my child, will either go with me, THE I LI AD or THE POEM OF FORCE 1 89 To a land where you will work at wretched tasks, Labouring for a pitiless master . . . In the mother's eyes, such a fate is, for her child , as terrible as death ; the husband would rather die than see his wife reduced to it ; all the plagues of heaven are invoked by the father against the army that subjects his daughter to it. Yet the victims themselves are beyond all this. Curses, feelings of rebellion, comparisons, reflections on the future and the past, are obliterated from the mind of the captive ; and memory itself barely lingers on . Fidelity to his city and his dead is not the slave's privilege . And what does it take to make the slave wee p ? The misfortune of his master, his oppressor, despoiler, pillager, of the man who laid waste his town and killed his dear ones under his very eyes. This man suffers or dies ; then the slave's tears come. And really why not ? This is for him the only occasion on which tears are permitted , are, indeed, required. A slave will always cry whenever he can do so with impunity - his situation keeps tears on tap for him. She spoke, weeping, and the women groaned, Using the pretext of Patroclus to bewail their own torments. Since the slave has no licence to express anything except what is pleasing to his master, it follows that the only emotion that can touch or enliven him a little, that can reach him in the desolation of his life, is the emotion of love for his master. There is no place else to send the gift of love ; all other outlets are barred, just as, with the horse in har­ ness, bit, shafts, reins bar every way but one . And if, by some miracle, in the slave's breast a hope is born , the hope of becoming, some day, through somebody's influence, someone once again, how far won't these captives go to show love and thankfulness, even though these emotions are addressed to the very men who should, considering the very recent past, still reek with horror for them : 1 90 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY My husband, to whom my father and respected mother gave me, I saw before the city transfixed by the sharp bronze . My three brothers, children , with me, of a single mother, So dear to me ! They all met their fatal day. But you did not allow me to weep, when swift Achilles Slaughtered my husband and laid waste the city of Mynes. You promised me that I would be taken by divine Achilles, For his legitimate wife, that he would carry me away in his ships, To Pythia, where our marriage would be celebrated among the Myrmidons, So without respite I mourn for you, you who have always been gentle. To lose more than the slave does is impossible, for he loses his whole inner life. A fragment of it he may get back if he sees the possibility of changing his fate, but this is his only hope. Such is the empire of force, as extensive as the empire of nature. Nature, too, when vital needs are at stake, can erase the whole inner life, even the grief of a mother : But the thought of eating came to her, when she was tired of tears. Force, in the hands of another, exercises over the soul the same tyranny that extreme hunger does ; for it possesses, and in perpetuo , the power of life and death . Its rule, moreover, is as cold and hard as the rule of inert matter. The man who knows himself weaker than another is more alone in the heart of a city than a man lost in the desert . Two casks are placed before Zeus's doorsill, Containing the gifts he gives, the bad in one, the good in the other . . . The man to whom he gives baneful gifts, he exposes to outrage ; THE I LIAD or THE POEM OF FORCE 191 A frightful need drives him across the divine earth ; He is a wanderer, and gets no respect from gods or men . Force is as pitiless to the man who possesses it, or thinks he does, as it is to its victims ; the second it crushes, the first it intoxicates. The truth is, nobody really possesses it. The human race is not divided up, in the Iliad, into conquered persons, slaves, suppliants, on the one hand, and con­ querors and chiefs on the other. In this poem there is not a single man who does not at one time or another have to bow his neck to force. The common soldier in the Iliad is free and has the right to bear arms ; nevertheless he is subject to the indignity of orders and abuse ; But whenever he came upon a commoner shouting out, He struck him with his sceptre and spoke sharply : 'Good for nothing ! Be still and listen to your betters, You are weak and cowardly and unwarlike, You count for nothing, neither in battle nor in counci l . ' Thersites pays dear for the perfectly reasonable comments he makes, comments not at all different, moreover, from those made by Achilles : He hit him with his sceptre on back and shoulders, So that he doubled over, and a great tear welled up, And a bloody welt appeared on his back Under the golden sceptre . Frightened, he sat down, Wiping away his tears, bewildered and in pain. Troubled though they were, the others laughed long at him. Achilles himself, that proud hero, the undefeated, is shown us at the outset of the poem, weeping with humilia­ tion and helpless grief - the woman he wanted for his bride has been taken from under his nose, and he has not dared to oppose it : . . . But Achilles Weeping, sat apart from his companions, 1 92 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY By the white-capped waves, staring over the boundless ocean. What has happened is that Agamemnon has deliberately humiliated Achilles, to show that he himself is the master : . . . So you will learn That I am greater than you, and anyone else will hesitate To treat me as an equal and set himself against me. But a few days pass, and now the supreme commander is weeping in his turn . He must humble himself, he must plead , and have, moreover, the added misery of doing it all tn vam. I n the same way, there is not a single one of the com­ batants who is spared the shameful experience of fear. The heroes quake like everybody else . It only needs a challenge from Hector to throw the whole Greek force into consterna­ tion - except for Achilles and his men, and they did not happen to be present : He spoke and all grew still and held their peace, Ashamed to refuse, afraid to accept . But once Ajax comes forward and offers himself, fear quickly changes sides : A shudder of terror ran through the Trojans, making their limbs weak ; And Hector himself felt his heart leap in his breast. But he no longer had the right to tremble, or to run away . . . Two days later, it is Ajax's turn to be terrified : Zeus the father on high, makes fear rise in Ajax. He stops, overcome, puts behind him his buckler made of seven hides, Trembles, looks at the crowd around, like a wild beast . . . THE I LIAD or THE POEM OF FORCE 1 93 Even to Achilles the moment comes ; he too must shake and stammer with fear, though it is a river that has this effect on him, not a man. But, with the exception of Achilles, every man in the Iliad tastes a moment of defeat in battle . Victory is less a matter of valour than of blind destiny, which is symbolized in the poem by Zeus's golden scales : Then Zeus the father took his golden scales, In them he put the two fates of death that cuts down all men, One for the Trojans, tamers of horses, one for the bronze-sheathed Greeks. He seized the scales by the middle ; it was the fatal day of Greece that sank. By its very blindness, destiny establishes a kind of justice . Blind also is she who decrees to warriors punishment in kind. He that takes the sword, will perish by the sword . The Iliad formulated the principle long before the Gospels did, and in almost the same terms : Ares is just, and kills those who kill . Perhaps all men, by the very act of being born, are destined to suffer violence ; yet this is a truth to which circumstance shuts men's eyes. The strong are, as a matter of fact, never absolutely strong, nor are the weak absolutely weak, but ueither is aware of this. They have in common a refusal to believe that they both belong to the same species : the weak see no relation between themselves and the strong, and vice versa. The man who is the possessor of force seems to walk through a non-resistant element ; in the human substance that surrounds him nothing has the power to interpose, between the impulse and the act, the tiny interval that is reflection. Where there is no room for reflection, there is none either for justice or prudence . Hence we see men in arms behaving harshly and madly. We see their sword bury itself in the breast of a disarmed enemy who is in the very act of pleading at their knees . We see them triumph over a 1 94 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY dying man by describing to him the outrages his corpse will endure. We see Achilles cut the throats of twelve Trojan boys on the funeral pyre of Patroclus as naturally as we cut flowers for a grave. These men, wielding power, have no suspicion of the fact that the consequences of their deeds will at length come home to them - they too will bow the neck in their turn. If you can make an old man fall silent, tremble, obey, with a single word of your own, why should it occur to you that the curses of this old man, who is after all a priest, will have their own importance in the gods' eyes? Why should you refrain from taking Achilles' girl away from him if you know that neither he nor she can do anything but obey you ? Achilles rejoices over the sight of the Greeks fleeing in misery and confusion. What could possibly suggest to him that this rout, which will last exactly as long as he wants it to and end when his mood indicates it, that this very rout will be the cause of his friend's death , and, for that matter, of his own ? Thus it happens that those who have force on loan from fate count on it too much and are destroyed. But at the time their own destruction seems impossible to them . For they do not see that the force in their possession is only a limited quantity ; nor do they see their relations with other human beings as a kind of balance between unequal amounts of force. Since other people do not impose on their movements that halt, that interval of hesitation, wherein lies all our consideration for our brothers in humanity, they conclude that destiny has given complete licence to them, and none at all to their inferiors. And at this point they exceed the measure of the force that is actually at their disposal . Inevitably they exceed it, since they are not aware that it is limited. And now we see them committed irretrievably to chance ; suddenly things cease to obey them. Sometimes chance is kind to them, sometimes cruel. But in any case there they are, exposed, open to misfortune ; gone is the armour of power that formerly protected their naked souls ; nothing, no shield , stands be­ tween them and tears. THE I LI AD or THE POEM OF FORCE 195 This retribution, which has a geometrical rigour, which operates automatically to penalize the abuse of force, was the main subject of Greek thought. It is the soul of the epic. Under the name of Nemesis, it functions as the mainspring of Aeschylus's tragedies. To the Pythagoreans, to Socrates and Plato, it was the jumping-off point of speculation upon the nature of man and the universe. Wherever H ellenism has penetrated, we find the idea of it familiar. In Oriental countries which are steeped in Buddhism, it is perhaps this Greek idea that has lived on under the name of Kharma. The Occident, however, has lost it, and no longer even has a word to express it in any of its languages : conceptions of limit, measure, equilibrium, which ought to determine the conduct of life are, in the West, restricted to a servile function in the vocabulary of technics. We are only geo­ metricians of matter ; the Greeks were, first of all , geometri­ cians in their apprenticeship to virtue. The progress of the war in the Iliad is simply a continual game of seesaw . The victor of the moment feels himself invincible, even though, only a few hours before, he may have experienced defeat ; he forgets to treat victory as a transitory thing. At the end of the first day of combat described in the Iliad, the victorious Greeks were in a position to obtain the object of all their efforts, i . e . Helen and her riches - assuming of course as Homer did , that the Greeks had reason to believe that Helen was in Troy. Actually, the Egyptian priests, who ought to have known, affirmed later on to Herodotus that she was in Egypt. I n any case, that evening the Greeks are n o longer interested in her or her possessions : 'For the present, let us not accept the riches of Paris ; Nor Helen ; everybody sees, even the most ignorant, That Troy stands on the verge of ruin . ' H e spoke, and all the Achaians acclaimed him. What they want is, in fact, everything. For booty, all the riches of Troy ; for their bonfires, all the palaces, temples, 196 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY houses ; for slaves, all the women and children ; for corpses, all the men. They forget one detail , that everything is not within their power, for they are not in Troy. Perhaps they will be there tomorrow ; perhaps not. Hector, the same day, makes the same mistake : For I know well in my entrails and in my heart, A day will come when Holy Troy will perish, And Priam, and the nation of Priam of the good lance . But I think less of the grief that is in store for the Trojans . And of Hecuba herself, and of Priam the king, And of my brothers, so numerous and so brave, Who will fall in the dust under the blows of the enemy, Than of you that day when a Greek in his bronze breastplate Will drag you away weeping and deprive you of your liberty. But as for me, may I be dead, and may the earth have covered me Before I hear you cry out or see you dragged away ! At this moment what would he not give to turn aside those horrors which he believes to be inevitable ? But at this moment nothing he could give would be of any use. The next day but one, however, the Greeks have run away miserably, and Agamemnon himself is in favour of putting to the sea again . And now Hector, by making a very few concessions, could readily secure the enemy's departure ; yet now he is even unwilling to let them go empty-handed : Set fires everywhere and let the brightness mount the skies Lest in the night the long-haired Greeks, Escaping, sail over the broad back of ocean . . . . Let each of them take home a wound to heal . . . thus others will fear THE ILIAD or THE POEM OF FORCE 1 97 To bring dolorous war to the Trojans, tamers of horses. His wish is granted ; the Greeks stay ; and the next day they reduce Hector and his men to a pitiable condition : As for them - they fled across the plain like cattle Whom a lion hunts before him in the dark midnight. . . . Thus the mighty Agamemnon, son of Atreus, pursued them, Steadily killing the hindmost ; and still they fled . I n the course of the afternoon, Hector regains the ascen­ dancy, withdraws again, then puts the Greeks to flight, then is repulsed by Patroclus, who has come in with his fresh troops. Patroclus, pressing his advantage, ends by finding himself exposed , wounded and without armour, to the sword of H ector. And finally that evening the victorious Hector hears the prudent counsel of Polydamas and repudi­ ates it sharply : Now that wily Kronos's son has given me Glory at the ships ; now that I have driven the Greeks to the sea, Do not offer, fool, such counsels to the people. No Trojan will listen to you ; nor would I permit it . . . . So Hector spoke, and the Trojans acclaimed him . . . . The next day Hector is lost . Achilles has harried him across the field and is about to kill him . He has always been the stronger of the two in combat ; how much the more so now, after several weeks of rest, ardent for vengeance and vic­ tory, against an exhausted enemy? And Hector stands alone , before the walls of Troy, absolutely alone, alone to wait for death and to steady his soul to face it : Alas, were I to slip through the gate , behind the rampart, Polydamas at once would heap dishonour on me . . . . 1 98 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY And now that through my recklessness I have destroyed my people, I fear the Trojans and the long-robed Trojan women, I fear to hear from someone far less brave than I : 'Hector, trusting in his own strength too far, has ruined his people . ' . . . Suppose I were to down my bossed shield, My massive helmet, and, leaning my spear against the wall , Should g o t o meet renowned Achilles ? . . . But why spin out these fancies? Why such dreams ? I would not reach him, nor would he pity me, Or respect me. He would kill me like a woman If I came naked thus . . . . Not a jot of the grief and ignominy that fall to the unfor­ tunate is Hector spared. Alone, stripped of the prestige of force, he discovers that the courage that kept him from taking to the shelter of the walls is not enough to save him from flight : Seeing him, Hector began to tremble. He had not the heart To stay . . . . . . It is not for a ewe nor the skin of an ox, That they are striving, not these ordinary rewards of the race ; It is for a life that they run , the life of Hector, tamer of horses. Wounded to death, he enhances his conqueror's triumph by vain supplications : I implore you , by your soul, by your knees, by your parents . . . . But the auditors of the Iliad knew that the death of Hector would be but a brief joy to Achilles, and the death of Achilles but a brief joy to the Trojans, and the destruction of Troy but a brief joy to the Achaians. THE I LI AD or THE POEM OF FORCE 1 99 Thus violence obliterates anybody who feels its touch . It comes to seem just as external to its employer as to its victim. And from this springs the idea of a destiny before which executioner and victim stand equally innocent, be­ fore which conquered and conqueror are brothers in the same distress. The conquered brings misfortune to the conqueror, and vice versa : A single son, short-lived, was born to him . Neglected by me, he grows old - for far from home I camp before Troy, injuring you and your sons. A moderate use of force, which alone would enable man to escape being enmeshed in its machinery, would require superhuman virtue, which is as rare as dignity in weakness. Moreover, moderation itself is not without its perils, since prestige, from which force derives at least three-quarters of its strength , rests principally upon that marvellous indif­ ference that the strong feel toward the weak, an indifference so contagious that it infects the very people who are the objects of it . Yet ordinarily excess is not arrived at through prudence or politic considerations. On the contrary, man dashes to it as to an irresistible temptation . The voice of reason is occasionally heard in the mouths of the characters in the Iliad. Thersites' speeches are reasonable to the highest degree ; so are the speeches of the angry Achilles : Nothing is worth my life, not all the goods They say the well-built city of I lium contains . . . . A man can capture steers and fatted sheep But, once gone, the soul cannot be captured back. B ut words of reason drop into the void . If they come from an inferior, he is punished and shuts up ; if from a chief, his actions betray them . And failing everything else, there is always a god handy to advise him to be unreason­ able. In the end, the very idea of wanting to escape the role fate has allotted one - the business of killing and dying disappears from the mind : 200 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY We to whom Zeus Has assigned suffering, from youth to old age, Suffering in grievous wars, till we perish to the last man. Already these warriors, like Craonne's so much later, felt, themselves to be 'condemned men'. It was the simplest trap that pitched them into this situa­ tion. At the outset, at the embarkation, their hearts are light, as hearts always are if you have a large force on your side and nothing but space to oppose you . Their weapons are in their hands ; the enemy is absent . Unless your spirit has been conquered in advance by the reputation of the enemy, you always feel yourself to be much stronger than anybody who is not there. An absent man does not impose the yoke of necessity. To the spirits of those embarking no necessity yet presents itself ; consequently they go off as though to a game, as though on holiday from the confine­ ment of daily life. Where have they gone, those braggadocio boasts We proudly flung upon the air at Lemnos, Stuffing ourselves with flesh of horned steers, Drinking from cups brimming over with wine ? As for Trojans - a hundred or two each man of us Could handle in battle. And now one is too much for us. B ut the first contact of war does not immediately destroy the illusion that war is a game. War's necessity is terrible, altogether different in kind from the necessity of peace. So terrible is it that the human spirit will not submit to it so long as it can possibly escape ; and whenever it can escape it takes refuge in long days empty of necessity, days of play, of revery, days arbitrary and unreal . Danger then becomes an abstraction ; the lives you destroy are like toys broken by a child, and quite as incapable of feeling ; heroism is but a theatrical gesture and smirched with boastfulness. This THE I LIAD or THE POEM OF FORCE 20 1 becomes doubly true if a momentary access of vitality comes to reinforce the divine hand that wards off defeat and death . Then war is easy and basely, coarsely loved. But with the majority of the combatants this state of mind does not persist. Soon there comes a day when fear, or defeat, or the death of beloved comrades touches the warrior's spirit, and it crumples in the hand of necessity. At that moment war is no more a game or a dream ; now at last the warrior cannot doubt the reality of its existence . And this reality, which he perceives, is hard , much too hard to be borne, for it enfolds death. Once you acknowledge death to be a practical possibility, the thought of it becomes unendurable, except in flashes. True enough, all men are fated to die ; true enough also, a soldier may grow old in battles ; yet for those whose spirits have bent under the yoke of war, the relation between death and the future is dif­ ferent than for other men . For other men death appears as a limit set in advance on the future ; for the soldier death is the future, the future his profession assigns him. Yet the idea of man's having death for a future is abhorrent to nature. Once the experience of war makes visible the possi­ bility of death that lies locked up in each moment, our thoughts cannot travel from one day to the next without meeting death's face. The mind is then strung up to a pitch it can stand for only a short time ; but each new dawn reintroduces the same necessity ; and days piled on days make years. On each one of these days the soul suffers violence. Regularly, every morning, the soul castrates itself of aspiration, for thought cannot journey through time without meeting death on the way. Thus war effaces all conceptions of purpose or goal, including even its own 'war aims'. It effaces the very notion of war's being brought to an end. To be outside a situation so violent as this is to find it inconceivable ; to be inside it is to be unable to conceive its end . Consequently, nobody does anything to bring this end about . In the presence of an armed enemy, what hand can relinquish its weapon ? The mind ought to find a way out, but the mind has lost all capacity to so much as look outward. 202 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY The mind is completely absorbed in doing itself violence. Always in human life, whether war or slavery is in question, intolerable sufferings continue, as it were, by the force of their own specific gravity, and so look to the out­ sider as though they were easy to bear ; actually, they con­ tinue because they have deprived the sufferer of the re­ sources which might serve to extricate him. Nevertheless, the soul that is enslaved to war cries out for deliverance, but deliverance itself appears to it in an ex­ treme and tragic aspect, the aspect of destruction. Any other solution, more moderate, more reasonable in charac­ ter, would expose the mind to suffering so naked, so violent that it could not be borne, even as memory. Terror, grief, exhaustion, slaughter, the annihilation of comrades - is it credible that these things should not continually tear at the soul, if the intoxication of force had not intervened to drown them? The idea that an unlimited effort should bring in only a limited profit or no profit at all is terribly painful . What? Will we let Priam and the Trojans boast Of Argive Helen, she for whom so many Greeks D ied before Troy, far from their native land ? What? Do you want us to leave the city, wide-streeted Troy, Standing, when we have suffered so much for it ? But actually what is Helen to Ulysses ? What indeed is Troy, full of riches that will not compensate him for Ithaca's ruin? For the Greeks, Troy and Helen are in reality mere sources of blood and tears ; to master them is to master frightful memories. If the existence of an enemy has made a soul destroy in itself the thing nature put there, then the only remedy the soul can imagine is the destruction of the enemy. At the same time the death of dearly loved comrades arouses a spirit of sombre emulation, a rivalry in death : May I die, then, at once ! Since fate has not let me Protect my dead friend, who far from home Perished, longing for me to defend him from death. THE I LIAD or THE POEM OF FORCE 203 So now I go to seek the murderer of my friend, Hector. And death shall I find at the moment Zeus wills it Zeus and the other immortals. It is the same despair that drives him on toward death, on the one hand, and slaughter on the other : I know it well , my fate is to perish here, Far from father and dearly loved mother ; but meanwhile I shall not stop till the Trojans have had their fill of war. The man possessed by this twofold need for death belongs, so long as he has not become something still different, to a different race from the race of the living. What echo can the timid hopes of life strike in such a heart ? How can it hear the defeated begging for another sight of the light of day ? The threatened life has already been relieved of nearly all its consequences by a single, simple distinction : it is now unarmed ; its adversary possesses a weapon . Furthermore, how can a man who has rooted out of himself the notion that the light of day is sweet to the eyes respect such a notion when it makes its appearance in some futile and humble lament ? I clasp tight your knees, Achilles. Have a thought, have pity for me. I stand here, 0 son of Zeus, a suppliant, to be respected. I n your house it was I first tasted Demeter's bread, That day in my well-pruned vineyard you caught me And sold me, sending me far from father and friends, To holy Lemnos ; a hundred oxen was my price. And now I will pay you three hundred for ransom . This dawn is for me my twelfth day in Troy, After so many sorrows. See me here, in your hands, Through some evil fate. Zeus surely must hate me Who again puts me into your hands. Alas, my poor mother, Laothoe, D aughter of the old man, Altes - a short-lived son you have borne. 204 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY What a reception this feeble hope gets ! Come, friend , you too must die . Why make a fuss about it ? Patroclus, he too has died - a far better man than you are. Don't you see how handsome I am, how mighty? A noble father begat me, and I have a goddess for mother. Yet even I , like you, must some day encounter my fate, Whether the hour strikes at noon, or evening, or sunrise, The hour that comes when some arms-bearing warrior will kill me. To respect life in somebody else when you have had to cas­ trate yourself of all yearning for it demands a truly heartbreak­ ing exertion of the powers of generosity. It is impossible to imagine any of Homer's warriors being capable of such an ex­ ertion, unless it is that warrior who dwells, in a peculiar way, at the very centre of the poem - I mean Patroclus, who 'knew how to be sweet to everybody', and who throughout the Iliad commits no cruel or brutal act. But then how many men do we know, in several thousand years of human history, who would have displayed such god-like generosity? Two or three? - even this is doubtful . Lacking this generosity, the conquering soldier is like a scourge of nature. Possessed by war, he, like the slave, becomes a thing, though his manner of doing so is different - over him too, words are as power­ less as over matter itself. And both , at the touch of force, experience its inevitable effects : they become deaf and dumb. Such is the nature of force. Its power of converting a man into a thing is a double one, and in its application double­ edged. To the same degree, though in different fashions, those who use it and those who endure it are turned to stone. This property of force achieves its maximum effec­ tiveness during the clash of arms, in battle, when the tide of the day has turned, and everything is rushing toward a decision. It is not the planning man, the man of strategy, the man acting on the resolution taken, who wins or loses a battle ; battles are fought and decided by men deprived of THE I L I AD or THE POEM OF FORCE 205 these faculties, men who have undergone a transformation, who have dropped either to the level of inert matter, which is pure passivity, or to the level of blind force, which is pure momentum . Herein lies the last secret of war, a secret revealed by the Iliad in its similes, which liken the warriors either to fire, flood, wind, wild beasts, or God knows what blind cause of disaster, or else to frightened animals, trees, water, sand, to anything in nature that is set into motion by the violence of external forces. Greeks and Trojans, from one day to the next, sometimes even from one hour to the next, experience, turn and turn about, one or the other of these transmutations : As when a lion, murderous, springs among the cattle Which by thousands are grazing over some vast marshy field . . . . And their flanks heave with terror ; even so the Achaians Scattered in panic before Hector and Zeus, the great father. As when a ravening fire breaks out deep in a bushy wood And the wheeling wind scatters sparks far and wide, And trees, root and branch, topple over in flames ; So Atreus' son , Agamemnon , roared through the ranks Of the Trojans in flight . . . . The art of war is simply the art of producing such trans­ formations, and its equipment, its processes, even the casualties it inflicts on the enemy, are only means directed towards this end - its true object is the warrior's soul. Yet these transformations are always a mystery ; the gods are their authors, the gods who kindle men's imagination . But however caused, this petrifactive quality of force, twofold always, is essential to its nature ; and a soul which has entered the province of force will not escape this except by a miracle. Such miracles are rare and of brief duration . 206 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY The wantonness of the conqueror that knows no respect for any creature or thing that is at its mercy or is imagined to be so, the despair of the soldier that drives him on to destruction, the obliteration of the slave or the conquered man, the wholesale slaughter - all these elements combine in the Iliad to make a picture of uniform horror, of which force is the sole hero. A monotonous desolation would result were it not for those few luminous moments, scattered here and there through­ out the poem, those brief, celestial moments in which man possesses his soul. The soul that awakes then, to live for an instant only and be lost almost at once in force's vast kingdom, awakes pure and whole ; it contains no ambiguities, nothing complicated or turbid ; it has no room for anything but courage and love. Sometimes it is in the course of inner deliberation that a man finds his soul : he meets it, like Hector before Troy, as he tries to face destiny on his own terms, without the help of gods or men. At other times, it is in a moment of love that men discover their souls - and there is hardly any form of pure love known to humanity of which the Iliad does not treat. The tradition of hospitality persists, even through several generations, to dispel the blindness of combat . Thus I am for you a beloved guest in the breast of Argos . . . Let us turn our lances away from each other, even in battle. The love of the son for the parents, of father for son, of mother for son , is continually described , in a manner as touching as it is curt : Thetis answered, shedding tears, 'Yau were born to me for a short life, my child , as you say . . .' Even brotherly love : My three brothers whom the same mother bore for me, So dear. . . . THE I LIAD or THE POEM OF FORCE 207 Conjugal love, condemned to sorrow, is of an astonishing purity. Imagining the humiliations of slavery which await a beloved wife , the husband passes over the one indignity which even in anticipation would stain their tenderness . What could be simpler than the words spoken by his wife to the man about to die ? . . . Better for me Losing you , to go under the earth. No other comfort Will remain, when you have encountered your death-heavy fate, Only grief, only sorrow . . . . Not less touching are the words addressed to a dead husband : Dear husband, you died young, and left me your widow Alone in the palace. Our child is still tiny, The child you and I, crossed by fate, had together. I think he will never grow up . . . For not in your bed did you die, holding my hand And speaking to me prudent words which forever Night and day, as I weep, might live in my memory. The most beautiful friendship of all, the friendship between comrades-at-arms, is the final theme of The Epic : . . . But Achilles Wept , dreaming of the beloved comrade ; sleep, all-prevailing, Would not take him ; he turned over again and agam . But the purest triumph of love , the crowning grace of war, is the friendship that floods the hearts of mortal enemies. Before it a murdered son or a murdered friend no longer cries out for vengeance . Before it - even more miraculous ­ the distance between benefactor and suppliant, between victor and vanquished, shrinks to nothing : 208 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY But when thirst and hunger had been appeased, Then Dardanian Priam fell to admiring Achilles. How tall he was, and handsome ; he had the face of a god ; And in his turn Dardanian Priam was admired by Achilles, Who watched his handsome face and listened to his words. And when they were satisfied with contemplation of each other . . . These moments of grace are rare in the Iliad, but they are enough to make us feel with sharp regret what it is that violence has killed and will kill again . However, such a heaping-up of violent deeds would have a frigid effect, were it not for the note of incurable bitterness that continually makes itself heard, though often only a single word marks its presence, often a mere stroke of the verse, or a run-on line. It is in this that the Iliad is abso­ lutely unique, in this bitterness that proceeds from tender­ ness and that spreads over the whole human race, impartial as sunlight. Never does the tone lose its colouring of bitter­ ness ; yet never does the bitterness drop into lamentation . Justice and love, which have hardly any place in this study of extremes and of unjust acts of violence, nevertheless bathe the work in their light without ever becoming notice­ able themselves, except as a kind of accent. Nothing pre­ cious is scorned, whether or not death is its destiny ; every­ one's unhappiness is laid bare without dissimulation or disdain ; no man is set above or below the condition com­ mon to all men ; whatever is destroyed is regretted . Victors and vanquished are brought equally near us ; under the same head, both are seen as counterparts of the poet, and the listener as well. If there is any difference, it is that the enemy's misfortunes are possibly more sharply felt. So he fell there, put to sleep in the sleep of bronze, Unhappy man, far from his wife, defending his own people . . . . THE ILIAD or THE POEM OF FORCE 209 And what accents echo the fate of the lad Achilles sold at Lemnos ! Eleven days he rejoiced his heart among those he loved, Returning from Lemnos ; the twelfth day, once more, God delivered him into the hands of Achilles, To him who had to send him, unwilling, to Hades . And the fate of Euphorbus, who saw only a single day of war. Blood soaked his hair, that hair like to the Graces' . . . When Hector is lamented : . . . guardian of chaste wives and little children . . . . In these few words, chastity appears, dirtied by force, and childhood, delivered to the sword . The fountain at the gates of Troy becomes an object of poignant nostalgia when Hector runs by, seeking to elude his doom : Close by there stood the great stone tanks, Handsomely built, where silk-gleaming garments Were washed clean by Troy's lovely daughters and housewives In the old days of peace , long ago, when the Greeks had not come . Past these did they run their race, pursued and pursuer. The whole of the Iliad lies under the shadow of the greatest calamity the human race can experience - the destruction of a city. This calamity could not tear more at the heart had the poet been born in Troy. But the tone is not different when the Achaeans are dying, far from hom"! . I n so far as this other life, the life of the living, seems calm and full, the brief evocations of the world of peace are felt as pain : With the break of dawn and the rising of the day, On both sides arrows flew, men fell. 210 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY But at the very hour that the woodcutter goes home to fix his meal In the mountain valleys when his arms have had enough Of hacking great trees, and disgust rises in his heart, And the desire for sweet food seizes his entrails, At that hour, by their valour, the Danaans broke the front. Whatever is not war, whatever war destroys or threatens, the Iliad wraps in poetry ; the realities of war, never. No reticence veils the step from life to death : Then his teeth flew out ; from two sides, Blood came to his eyes ; the blood that from lips and nostrils He was spilling, open-mouthed ; death enveloped him in its black cloud. The cold brutality of the deeds of war is left undisguised ; neither victors nor vanquished are admired, scorned, or hated. Almost always, fate and the gods decide the chang­ ing lot of battle. Within the limits fixed by fate, the gods determine with sovereign authority victory and defeat. It is always they who provoke those fits of madness, those treacheries, which are forever blocking peace ; war is their true business ; their only motives, caprice and malice. As for the warriors, victors or vanquished, those comparisons which liken them to beasts or things can inspire neither admiration nor contempt, but only regret that men are capable of being so transformed. There may be, unknown to us, other expressions of the extraordinary sense of equity which breathes through the Iliad ; certainly it has not been imitated. One is barely aware that the poet is a Greek and not a Trojan. The tone of the poem furnishes a direct clue to the origin of its oldest portions ; history perhaps will never be able to tell us more. I f one believes with Thucydides that eighty years after the fall of Troy, the Achaeans in their turn were conquered, THE ILIAD or THE POEM OF FORCE 211 one may ask whether these songs, with their rare references to iron , are not the songs of a conquered people, of whom a few went into exile. Obliged to live and die 'very far from the homeland', like the Greeks who fell before Troy, having lost their cities like the Trojans, they saw their own image both in the conquerors, who had been their fathers, and in the conquered, whose misery was like their own . They could still see the Trojan war over that brief span of years in its true light, unglossed by pride or shame. They could look at it as conquered and as conquerors simultaneously, and so perceive what neither conqueror nor conquered ever saw, for both were blinded . Of course, this is mere fancy ; one can see such distant times only in fancy's light . I n any case, this poem is a miracle. Its bitterness is the only justifiable bitterness, for it springs from the subjection of the human spirit to force , that is, in the last analysis, to matter. This subjection is the common lot, although each spirit will bear it differently, in proportion to its own virtue . No one in the Iliad is spared by it, as no one on earth is. No one who succumbs to it is by virtue of this fact regarded with contempt. Whoever, within his own soul and in human relations, escapes the dominion of force is loved but loved sorrowfully because of the threat of destruction that constantly hangs over him . Such is the spirit of the only true epic the Occident possesses. The Odyssey seems merely a good imitation, now of the Iliad, now of Oriental poems ; the Aeneid is an imitation which, however brilliant, is disfigured by frig­ idity, bombast, and bad taste. The chansons de geste , lack­ ing the sense of equity, could not attain greatness : in the Chanson de Roland, the death of an enemy does not come home to either author or reader in the same way as does the death of Roland. Attic tragedy, or at any rate the tragedy of Aeschylus and Sophocles, is the true continuation of the epic. The concep­ tion of justice enlightens it, without ever directly interven­ ing in it ; here force appears in its coldness and hardness, 212 SIMONE WElL - N.J ANTHOLOGY always attended by effects from whose fatality neither those who use it or those who suffer it can escape ; here the shame of the coerced spirit is neither disguised, nor enveloped in facile pity, nor held up to scorn ; here more than one spirit bruised and degraded by misfortune is offered for our admiration. The Gospels are the last marvellous expression of the Greek genius, as the Iliad is the first : here the Greek spirit reveals itself not only in the injunction given mankind to seek above all other goods, 'the kingdom and justice of our Heavenly Father', but also in the fact that human suffering is laid bare, and we see it in a being who is at once divine and human. The accounts of the Passion show that a divine spirit, incarnate, is changed by misfortune, trembles before suffering and death, feels itself, in the depths of its agony, to be cut off from man and God . The sense of human misery gives the Gospels that accent of simplicity that is the mark of the Greek genius, and that endows Greek tragedy and the Iliad with all their value. Certain phrases have a ring strangely reminiscent of the epic, and it is the Trojan lad dispatched to Hades, though he does not wish to go, who comes to mind when Christ says to Peter : 'Another shall gird thee and carry thee whither thou wouldst not . ' This accent cannot be separated from the idea that inspired the Gospels, for the sense of human misery is a pre-condition of justice and love . He who does not realize to what extent shifting fortune and necessity hold in subjec­ tion every human spirit, cannot regard as fellow-creatures nor love as he loves himself those whom chance separated from him by an abyss. The variety of constraints pressing upon man give rise to the illusion of several distinct species that cannot communicate. Only he who has measured the dominion of force, and knows how not to respect it, is capable of love and justice. The relations between destiny and the human soul , the extent to which each soul creates its own destiny, the ques­ tion of what elements in the soul are transformed by merci­ less necessity as it tailors the soul to fit the requirements of THE I LIAD or THE POEM OF FORCE 213 shifting fate, and o f what elements can o n the other hand be preserved , through the exercise of virtue and through grace - this whole question is fraught with temptations to false­ hood, temptations that are positively enhanced by pride, by shame, by hatred , contempt, indifference, by the will to oblivion or to ignorance. Moreover, nothing is so rare as to see misfortune fairly portrayed ; the tendency is either to treat the unfortunate person as though catastrophe were his natural vocation, or i:o ignore the effects of misfortune on the soul, to assume, that is, that the soul can suffer and remain unmarked by it, can fail, in fact, to be recast in misfortune's image . The Greeks, generally speaking, were endowed with spiritual force that allowed them to avoid self-deception . The rewards of this were great ; they dis­ covered how to achieve in all their acts the greatest lucidity, purity, and simplicity. But the spirit that was transmitted from the Iliad to the Gospels by way of the tragic poets never jumped the borders of Greek civilization ; once Greece was destroyed, nothing remained of this spirit but pale reflections. B oth the Romans and the Hebrews believed themselves to be exempt from the misery that is the common human lot. The Romans saw their country as the nation chosen by destiny to be mistress of the world ; with the Hebrews, it was their God who exalted them and they retained their superior position just as long as they obeyed Him. Strang­ ers, enemies, conquered peoples, subjects, slaves, were ob­ jects of contempt to the Romans ; and the Romans had no epics, no tragedies. In Rome gladiatorial fights took the place of tragedy. With the Hebrews, misfortune was a sure indication of sin and hence a legitimate object of contempt ; to them a vanquished enemy was abhorrent to God himself and condemned to expiate all sorts of crimes - this is a view that makes cruelty permissible and indeed indispensable . And no text of the Old Testament strikes a note comparable to the note heard in the Greek epic, unless it be certain parts of the book of Job. Throughout twenty centuries of Christianity, the Romans and the Hebrews have been 214 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY admired, read, imitated, both in deed and word ; their masterpieces have yielded an appropriate quotation every time anybody had a crime he wanted to justify. Furthermore, the spirit of the Gospels was not handed down in a pure state .from one Christian generation to the next . To undergo suffering and death joyfully was from the very beginning considered a sign of grace in the Christian martyrs - as though grace could do more for a human being than it could for Christ. Those who believe that God him­ self, once he became man, could not face the harshness of destiny without a long tremor of anguish, should have understood that the only people who can give the impres­ sion of having risen to a higher plane, who seem superior to ordinary human misery, are the people who resort to the aids of illusion, exaltation, fanaticism, to conceal the harsh­ ness of destiny from their own eyes. The man who does not wear the armour of the lie cannot experience force without being touched by it to the very soul. Grace can prevent this touch from corrupting him, but it cannot spare him the wound . Having forgotten it too well, Christian tradition can only rarely recover that simplicity that renders so poignant every sentence in the story of the Passion. On the other hand, the practice of forcible proselytization threw a veil over the effects of force on the souls of those who used it. I n spite of the brief intoxication induced at the time of the Renaissance by the discovery of Greek literature, there has been, during the course of twenty centuries, no revival of the Greek genius. Something of it was seen in Villon, in Shakespeare, Cervantes, Moliere, and - just once - in Racine. The bones of human suffering are exposed in L'Ecole des femmes and in Phedre , love being the context ­ a strange century indeed, which took the opposite view from that of the epic period, and would only acknowledge human suffering in the context of love, while it insisted on swathing with glory the effects of force in war and in poli­ tics. To the list of writers given above, a few other names might be added. But nothing the peoples of Europe have produced is worth the first known poem that appeared THE I LIAD or THE POEM OF FORCE 215 among them . Perhaps they will yet rediscover the epic genius, when they learn that there is no refuge from fate, learn not to admire force, not to hate the enemy, nor to scorn the unfortunate. How soon this will happen is another question. Translated by Mary McCarthy, Politics , New York, November 1945 . Originally published as 'L'l/iade ou le poeme de Ia force' [signed Emile Novis] , Cahiers du Sud, X I X , 230, December 1 940--J anuary 1 94 1 . VO ID A ND C OMPENSA TION uman mechanics. Whoever suffers tries to H communicate his suffering (either by ill-treating someone or calling forth their pity) in order to reduce it, and he does really reduce it in this way. In the case of a man in the uttermost depths, whom no one pities, who is without power to ill-treat anyone (if he has no child or being who loves him) , the suffering remains within and poisons him. This is imperative, like gravity. How can one gain deliverance? How gain deliverance from a force which is like gravity ? The tendency to spread evil beyond oneself : I still have it ! Beings and things are not sacred enough to me. May I never sully anything, even though I be utterly transformed into mud. To sully nothing, even in thought. Even in my worst moments I would not destroy a Greek statue or a fresco by Giotto . Why anything else then ? Why, for example, a moment in the life of a human being who could have been happy for that moment. It is impossible to forgive whoever has done us harm if that harm has lowered us. We have to think that it has not lowered us, but h as revealed our true level. VOID AND COMPENSATION 217 The wish to see others suffer exactly what w e are suffering. It is because of this that, except in periods of social instability, the spite of those in misfortune is directed against their fellows. That is a factor making for social stability. The tendency to spread the suffering beyond ourselves. If through excessive weakness we can neither call forth pity nor do harm to others, we attack what the universe itself represents for us . Then every good or beautiful thing is like an insult. To harm a person is to receive something from him. What ? What have we gained (and what will have to be repaid) when we have done harm ? We have gained in importance . We have expanded. We have filled an emptiness in ourselves by creating one in somebody else. To be able to hurt others with impunity - for instance to pass our anger on to an inferior who is obliged to be silent is to spare ourselves from an expenditure of energy, an expenditure which the other person will have to make . It is the same in the case of the unlawful satisfaction of any desire . The energy we economize in this way is immediately debased . To forgive . We cannot do this. When we are harmed by someone, reactions are set up within us. The desire for vengeance is a desire f0r essential equilibrium . We must seek equilibrium on another plane. We have to go as far as this limit by ourselves. There we reach the void. ( Heaven helps those who help themselves . . . . ) Headaches. At a certain moment, the pain is lessened by projecting it into the universe, but the universe is impaired ; the pain is more intense when it comes home again, but something in me does not suffer and remains in contact with a universe which is not impaired . Act in the same way 218 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY with the passions. Make them come down like a deposit, collect them into a point and become detached from them. Especially, treat all sufferings in this way. Prevent them from having access to things . The search for equilibrium is bad because it is imaginary. Revenge. Even if in fact we kill or torture our enemy it is, in a sense, tmagmary. A man who lived for his city, his family, his friends, to acquire wealth, improve his social position, etc. - a war : he is led away as a slave and henceforth for evermore he must wear himself out to the utmost limit of his strength merely in order to exist. That is frightful, impossible, and for this reason he will cling to any aim which presents itself no matter how wretched , be it only to have the slave punished who works at his side. He has no more choice about aims. Any aim at all is like a branch to a drowning man . Those whose city had been destroyed and who were led away into slavery had no longer either past or future : what had they with which to fill their minds? Lies and the meanest and most pitiful of covetous desires. They were perhaps more ready to risk crucifixion for the sake of stealing a chicken than they had formerly been to risk death in battle for the defence of their town . This is surely so, or those frightful tortures would not have been necessary. Otherwise they had to be able to endure a void in their minds. I n order to have the strength to contemplate affliction when we are afflicted we need supernatural bread. A situation which is too hard degrades us through the following process : as a general rule the energy supplied by higher emotions is limited. If the situation requires us to go beyond this limit we have to fall back on lower feelings (fear, covetousness, desire to beat the record, love of outward honours) which are richer in energy. VOID AND COMPENSATION 219 This limitation i s the key t o many a retrogression. Tragedy of those who, having been guided by the love of the Good into a road where suffering has to be endured, after a certain time reach their limit and become debased. A rock in our path. To hurl ourselves upon this rock as though after a certain intensity of desire had been reached it could not exist any more . Or else to retreat as though we ourselves did not exist. Desire contains something of the absolute and if it fails (once its energy has been used up) the absolute is transferred to the obstacle. This produces the state of mind of the defeated, the oppressed . To grasp (in each thing) that there is a limit and that without supernatural help that limit cannot be passed - or only by very little and at the price of a terrible fall afterwards. Energy, freed by the disappearance of the objects which provide motives, always tends to go downwards. Base feelings (envy, resentment) are degraded energy. Every kind of reward constitutes a degradation of energy. Self-satisfaction over a good action (or a work of art) is a degradation of higher energy. That is why the left hand should not know . . . . A purely imaginary reward (a smile from Louis XIV) is the exact equivalent of what we have expended, for it has exactly the same value as what we have expended - unlike real rewards which, as such, are either of higher or lower value. Hence imaginary advantages alone supply the energy for unlimited effort. But it is necessary that Louis XIV should really smile ; if he does not, it is an unutterable deprivation . A king can only pay out imaginary rewards most of the time or he would be insolvent. 220 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY It is the same with religion at a certain level . I nstead of receiving the smile of Louis XIV, we invent a God who smiles on us. Or again we praise ourselves. There must be an equivalent reward . This is as inevitable as gravity. A beloved being who disappoints me . I have written to him. It is impossible that he should not reply by saying what I have said to myself in his name. Men owe us what we imagine they will give us. We must forgive them this debt . To accept the fact that they are other than the creatures of our imagination is to imitate the renunciation of God . I also am other than what I imagine myself to be. To know this is forgiveness. From Gravity and Grace , translated by Emma Craufurd , Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1952. Originally published as La Pesanteur et Ia Grace, Pion, Paris, 1 947. D R A FT FOR A STATEMENT OF HUMAN OB LIGATIONS @ In this essay wn"tten in 1943, Simone Wei/ translates the word 'God' into tenns meaningful to the religious, the agnostic and the atheist. She sets out what she believes should be the rules governing political hfe. Vast though the problems were in drawing up such a document, she saw the need for some kind of guidelines as essential. This was particularly so since de Gaulle and the State Refonn Com­ mission, whose work had already begun, were using the old Declarations of 1 789 and 1 793 as the starting points of their proposed constitutional refonns. Her infinitely more radical view was that the very idea of nghts was too weak and dif­ fuse to be of any use and should be replaced by something else. It is possible that some of the ideas introduced in this work were not rejected out of hand. Indeed, in the Declaration published in the press of the Free French movement on 4 August 1 943, a list of rights is accompanied by a correspond­ ing list of duties or obligations. PROFESSION O F FA ITH There is a reality outside the world, that is to say, outside space and time, outside man's mental universe, outside any sphere whatsoever that is accessible to human faculties. 222 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY Corresponding to this reality, at the centre of the human heart, is the longing for an absolute good, a longing which is always there and is never appeased by any object in this world. Another terrestrial manifestation of this reality lies in the absurd and insoluble contradictions which are always the terminus of human thought when it moves exclusively in this world. Just as the reality of this world is the sole foundation of facts, so that other reality is the sole foundation of good. That reality is the unique source of all the good that can exist in this world : that is to say, all beauty, all truth, all justice, all legitimacy, all order, and all human behaviour that is mindful of obligations. Those minds whose attention and love are turned to­ wards that reality are the sole intermediary through which good can descend from there and come among men. Although it is beyond the reach of any human faculties, man has the power of turning his attention and love towards it. Nothing can ever justify the assumption that any man, whoever he may be, has been deprived of this power. It is a power which is only real in this world in so far as it is exercised. The sole condition for exercising it is consent. This act of consent may be expressed, or it may not be, even tacitly ; it may not be clearly conscious, although it has really taken place in the soul. Very often it is verbally expressed although it has not in fact taken place. But whether expressed or not, the one condition suffices : that it shall in fact have taken place. To anyone who does actually consent to directing his attention and love beyond the world, towards the reality that exists outside the reach of all human faculties, it is given to succeed in doing so. In that case, sooner or later, there descends upon him a part of the good, which shines through him upon all that surrounds him. The combination of these two facts - the longing in the depth of the heart for absolute good, and the power, though DRAFT FOR A STATEMENT OF HUMAN OBLIGATIONS 223 only latent, of directing attention and love to a reality beyond the world and of receiving good from it - consti­ tutes a link which attaches every man without exception to that other reality . Whoever recognizes that reality recognizes also that link. Because of it, he holds every human being without any excep­ tion as something sacred to which he is bound to show respect. This is the only possible motive for universal respect towards all human beings. Whatever formulation of belief or disbelief a man may choose to make , if his heart inclines him to feel this respect, then he in fact also recognizes a reality other than this world's reality. Whoever in fact does not feel this respect is alien to that other reality also . The reality of the world we live in is composed of variety. Unequal objects unequally solicit our attention. Certain people personally attract our attention, either through the hazard of circumstances or some chance affinity. For the lack of such circumstance or affinity other people remain unidentified . They escape our attention or, at the most, it only sees them as items of a collectivity. If our attention is entirely confined to this world it is entirely subject to the effect of these inequalities, which it is all the less able to resist because it is unaware of it. It is impossible to feel equal respect for things that are in fact unequal unless the respect is given to something that is identical in all of them . Men are unequal in all their rela­ tions with the things of this world , without exception. The only thing that is identical in all men is the presence of a link with the reality outside the world . All human beings are absolutely identical in so far as they can be thought of as consisting of a centre, which is an unquenchable desire for good, surrounded by an accretion of psychical and bodily matter. Only by really directing the attention beyond the world can there be real contact with this central and essential fact of human nature . Only an attention thus directed possesses the faculty, always identical in all cases, of irradiating with light any human being whatsoever. 224 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY If anyone possesses this faculty, then his attention is in reality directed beyond the world, whether he is aware of it or not. The link which attaohes the human being to the reality outside the world is, like the reality itself, beyond the reach of human faculties. The respect that it inspires as soon as it is recognized cannot be expressed to it. This respect cannot, in this world, find any form of direct expression . But unless it is expressed it has no existence. There is a possibility of indirect expression for it . The respect inspired by the link between man and the reality outside the world can be expressed to that part of man which exists in the reality of this world . The reality o f this world i s necessity. The part o f man which is in this world is the part which is in bondage to necessity and subject to the misery of need. The one possibility of indirect expression of respect for the human being is offered by men's needs, the needs of the soul and of the body, in this world. It is based upon the connection in human nature between the desire for good, which is the essence of man, and his sensibility. There is never any justification for doubting the existence in any man of this connection. Because of it, when a man's life is destroyed or damaged by some wound or privation of soul or body, which is due to other men's actions or negligence, it is not only his sensi­ bility that suffers but also his aspiration towards the good. Therefore there has been sacrilege towards that which is sacred in him. On the other hand, there are cases where it is only a man's sensibility that is affected ; for example, where his wound or privation is solely the result of the blind working of natural forces, or where he recognizes that the people who seem to be making him suffer are far from bearing him any ill will , but are acting solely in obedience to a necessity which he also acknowledges. The possibility of indirect expression of respect for the human being is the basis of obligation. Obligation is concerned DRAFT FOR A STATEMENT OF HUMAN OBLIGATIONS 225 with the needs in this world of the souls and bodies of human beings, whoever they may be. For each need there is a corresponding obligation ; for each obligation a corresponding need . There is no other kind of obligation, so far as human affairs are concerned. If there seem to be others, they are either false or else it is only by error that they have not been classed among the obligations mentioned . Anyone whose attention and love are really directed to­ wards the reality outside the world recognizes at the same time that he is bound, both in public and private life, by the single and permanent obligation to remedy, according to his responsibilities and to the extent of his power, all the priva­ tions of soul and body which are liable to destroy or damage the earthly life of any human being whatsoever. This obligation cannot legitimately be held to be limited by the insufficiency of power or the nature of the responsi­ bilities until everything possible has been done to explain the necessity of the limitation to those who will suffer by it ; the explanation must be completely truthful and must be such as to make it possible for them to acknowledge the necessity. No combination of circumstances ever cancels this ob­ ligation. If there are circumstances which seem to cancel it as regards a certain man or category of men , they impose it in fact all the more imperatively. The thought of this obligation is present to all men, but in very different forms and in very varying degrees of clarity. Some men are more and some are less inclined to accept - or to refuse - it as their rule of conduct . I ts acceptance is usually mixed with self-deception, and even when it is quite sincere it is not consistently acted upon. To refuse it is to become criminal. The proportions of good and evil in any society depend partly upon the proportion of consent to that of refusal and partly upon the distribution of power between those who consent and those who refuse . If any power of any kind is in the hands of a man who has 226 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY not given total, sincere, and enlightened consent to this obligation such power is misplaced. If a man has wilfully refused to consent, then it is in itself a criminal activity for him to exercise any function, major or minor, public or private, which gives him control over people's lives. All those who, with knowledge of his mind, have acquiesced in his exercise of the function are acces­ sories to the crime . Any State whose whole official doctrine constitutes an incitement to this crime is itself wholly criminal . It can retain no trace of legitimacy. Any State whose official doctrine is not primarily directed against this crime in all its forms is lacking in full legitimacy. Any legal system which contains no provisions against this crime is without the essence of legality. Any legal system which provides against some forms of this crime but not others is without the full character of legality. Any government whose members commit this crime, or authorize it in their subordinates, has betrayed its function . Any collectivity, institution, or form of collective life whatsoever whose normal functioning implies or induces the practice of this crime is convicted ipso facto of illegit­ imacy and should be reformed or abolished. Any man who has any degree of influence, however small , upon public opinion becomes an accessory to this crime if he refrains from denouncing it whenever it comes to his knowledge, or if he purposely avoids knowledge of it in order not to have to denounce it. A country is not innocent of this crime if public opinion, being free to express itself, does not denounce any current examples of it, or if, freedom of expression being forbid­ den, the crime is not denounced clandestinely. It is the aim of public life to arrange that all forms of power are entrusted, so far as possible, to men who effec­ tively consent to be bound by the obligation towards all human beings which lies upon everyone, and who under­ stand the obligation . DRAFT FOR A STATEMENT OF HUMAN OBLIGATIONS 227 Law is the totality of the permanent provisions for mak­ ing this aim effective. To understand the obligation involves two things : under­ standing the principle and understanding its application. Since it is with human needs in this world that the application is concerned, it is for the intelligence to con­ ceive the idea of need and to discern, discriminate , and enumerate , with all the accuracy of which it is capable, the earthly needs of the soul and of the body. This is a study which is permanently open to revision. STATE M E N T O F O B L I G AT I O N S A concrete conception of obligation towards human beings and a subdivision of it into a number of obligations is obtained by conceiving the earthly needs of the body and of the human soul. Each need entails a corresponding obligation . The needs of a human being are sacred. Their satisfac­ tion cannot be subordinated either to reasons of state, or to any consideration of money, nationality, race, or colour, or to the moral or other value attributed to the human being in question , or to any consideration whatsoever. There is no legitimate limit to the satisfaction of the needs of a human being except as imposed by necessity and by the needs of other human beings. The limit is only legitimate if the needs of all human beings receive an equal degree of attention . The fundamental obligation towards human beings is subdivided into a number of concrete obligations by the enumeration of the essential needs of the human being. Each need is related to an obligation, and each obligation to a need . The needs in question are earthly needs, for those are the only ones that man can satisfy. They are needs of the soul as well as of the body ; for the soul has needs whose non­ satisfaction leaves it in a state analogous to that of a starved or mutilated body. 228 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY The principal needs of the human body are food, warmth , sleep, health, rest, exercise, fresh air. The needs of the soul can for the most part be listed in pairs of opposites which balance and complete one another. The human soul has need of equality and of hierarchy. Equality is the public recognition, effectively expressed in institutions and manners, of the principle that an equal degree of attention is due to the needs of all human beings. H ierarchy is the scale of responsibilities. Since attention is inclined to direct itself upwards and remain fixed, special provisions are necessary to ensure the effective compati­ bility of equality and hierarchy. The human soul has need of consented obedience and of liberty. Consented obedience is what one concedes to an author­ ity because one judges it to be legitimate. It is not possible in relation to a political power established by conquest or coup d'etat nor to an economic power based upon money. Liberty is the power of choice within the latitude left between the direct constraint of natural forces and the authority accepted as legitimate . The latitude should be sufficiently wide for liberty to be more than a fiction, but it should include only what is innocent and should never be wide enough to permit certain kinds of crime. The human soul has need of truth and of freedom of expresston. The need for truth requires that intellectual culture should be universally accessible, and that it should be able to be acquired in an environment neither physically remote nor psychologically alien. It requires that in the domain of thought there should never be any physical or moral pressure exerted for any purpose other than an exclusive concern for truth ; which implies an absolute ban on all propaganda without exception . It calls for protection against error and lies ; which means that every avoidable material falsehood publicly asserted becomes a punishable offence. It calls for public health measures against poisons in the domain of thought. But, in order to be exercised, the intelligence requires to DRAFT FOR A STATEMENT OF HUM;W OBLIGATIONS 229 be free to express itself without control by any authority. There must therefore be a domain of pure intellectual research, separate but accessible to all, where no authority intervenes. The human soul has need of some solitude and privacy and also of some social life . The human soul has need of both personal property and collective property. Personal property never consists in the possession of a sum of money, but in the ownership of concrete objects like a house, a field, furniture, tools, which seem to the soul to be an extension of itself and of the body. Justice requires that personal property, in this sense, should be, like liberty, inalienable. Collective property is not defined by a legal title but by the feeling among members of a human milieu that certain objects are like an extension or development of the milieu . This feeling is only possible in certain objective conditions . The existence of a social class defined by the lack of personal and collective property is as shameful as slavery. The human soul has need of punishment and of honour. Whenever a human being, through the commission of a crime, has become exiled from good , he needs to be reinte­ grated with it through suffering. The suffering should be inflicted with the aim of bringing the soul to recognize freely some day that its infliction was just. This reintegra­ tion with the good is what punishment is. Every man who is innocent, or who has finally expiated guilt, needs to be recognized as honourable to the same extent as anyone else . The human soul has need of disciplined participation in a common task of public value, and it has need of personal initiative within this participation . The human soul has need of security and also of risk. The fear of violence or of hunger or of any other extreme evil is a sickness of the soul . The boredom produced by a complete absence of risk is also a sickness of the soul. The human soul needs above all to be rooted in several natural environments and to make contact with the universe through them. Examples of natural human environments are : a man's 230 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY country, and places where his language is spoken, and places with a culture or a historical past which he shares, and his professional milieu, and his neighbourhood . Everything which has the effect of uprooting a man or of preventing him from becoming rooted is criminal . Any place where the needs of human beings are satisfied can be recognized by the fact that there is a flowering of fraternity, joy, beauty, and happiness. Wherever people are lonely and turned in on themselves, wherever there is sad­ ness or ugliness, there are privations that need remedying. PRACTI CAL APPLICATION For this statement to become the practical inspiration of the country's life, the first condition is that it should be adopted by the people with that intention. The second condition is that anyone who wields or desires to wield any power of any kind - political, adminis­ trative, legal, economic, technical, spiritual , or other should have to pledge himself to adopt it as his practical rule of conduct. In such cases the equal and universal character of the obligation is to some extent modified by the particular responsibilities attaching to a particular office . It would therefore be necessary to amplify the pledge with the words : ' . . . paying especial attention to the needs of the human beings who are in my charge. ' The violation of such a pledge, either in word o r deed , should always in principle be punishable . But, in most cases, the institutions and public morals which would make such punishment possible would take several generations to create. Assent to this Statement implies a continual effort to bring such institutions and such morals into existence as rapidly as possible . From Selected Essays 1 934-43 by Simone Wei/, chosen and translated by Richard Rees, Oxford University Press, London, 1 962. A T TEN TION A ND WILL e do not have to understand new things, but by dint Wof patience, effort and method to come to understand with our whole self the truths which are evident. Stages of belief. The most commonplace truth when it floods the whole soul, is like a revelation . We have to try to cure our faults by attention and not by will . The will only controls a few movements of a few muscles, and these movements are associated with the idea of the change of position of nearby objects. I can will to put my hand flat on the table. If inner purity, inspiration or truth of thought were necessarily associated with attitudes of this kind, they might be the object of will. As this is not the case , we can only beg for them . To beg for them is to believe that we have a Father in heaven . Or should we cease to desire them ? What could be worse ? I nner supplication is the only reasonable way, for it avoids stiffening muscles which have nothing to do with the matter. What could be more stupid than to tighten up our muscles and set our jaws about virtue, or poetry, or the solution of a problem . Attention is something quite different. 232 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY Pride is a tightening up of this kind. There is a lack of grace (we can give the word its double meaning here) in the proud man. It is the result of a mistake. Attention, taken to its highest degree, is the same thing as prayer. It presupposes faith and love. Absolutely unmixed attention is prayer. If we turn our minds towards the good , it is impossible that little by little the whole soul will not be attracted thereto in spite of itself. Extreme attention is what constitutes the creative faculty in man and the only extreme attention is religious. The amount of creative genius in any period is strictly in proportion to the amount of extreme attention and thus of authentic religion at that period . The wrong way of seeking. The attention fixed on a problem. Another phenomenon due to horror of the void. We do not want to have lost our labour. The heat of the chase. We must not want to find : as in the case of an excessive devotion, we become dependent on the object of our efforts. We need an outward reward which chance sometimes provides and which we are ready to accept at the price of a deformation of the truth . It is only effort without desire (not attached to an object) which infallibly contains a reward . To draw back before the object we are pursuing. Only an indirect method is effective. We do nothing if we have not first drawn back. By pulling at the bunch, we make all the grapes fall to the ground. There are some kinds of effort which defeat their own object (example : the soured disposition of certain pious females, false asceticism, certain sorts of self-devotion, etc . ) . Others are always useful , even if they do not meet with success. AITENTION AND WILL 233 How are we to distinguish between them ? Perhaps in this way : some efforts are always accompanied by the (false) negation of our inner wretchedness ; with others the attention is continually concentrated on the distance there is between what we are and what we love. Love is the teacher of gods and men, for no one learns without desiring to learn . Truth is sought not because it is truth but because it is good. Attention is bound up with desire. Not with the will but with desire - or more exactly, consent. We liberate energy in ourselves, but it constantly reattaches itself. How are we to liberate it entirely ? We have to desire that it should be done in us - to desire it truly ­ · simply to desire it, not to try to accomplish it . For every attempt in that direction is vain and has to be dearly paid for. I n such a work all that I call 'I' has to be passive. Attention alone - that attention which is so full that the ' I ' disappears - i s required o f me. I have to deprive all that I call ' I ' of the light of my attention and turn it on to that which cannot be conceived . The capacity to drive a thought away once and for all is the gateway to eternity. The infinite in an instant . As regards temptations, we must follow the example of the truly chaste woman who, when the seducer speaks to her, makes no answer and pretends not to hear him. We should be indifferent to good and evil but, when we are indifferent, that is to say when we project the light of our attention equally on both, the good gains the day. This phenomenon comes about automatically. There lies the essential grace. And it is the definition, the criterion of good . A divine inspiration operates infallibly, irresistibly, if we do not turn away our attention, if we do not refuse it. There 234 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY is not a choice to be made in its favour, it is enough not to refuse to recognize that it exists. The attention turned with love towards God (or in a lesser degree, towards anything which is truly beautiful) makes certain things impossible for us. Such is the non-acting action of prayer in the soul . There are ways of behaviour which would veil such attention should they be indulged in and which, reciprocally, this attention puts out of the question. As soon as we have a point of eternity in the soul, we have nothing more to do but to take care of it, for it will grow of itself like a seed . It is necessary to surround it with an armed guard , waiting in stillness, and to nourish it with the contemplation of numbers, of fixed and exact relationships. We nourish the changeless which is in the soul by the contemplation of that which is unchanging in the body. Writing is like giving birth : we cannot help making the supreme effort. But we also act in like fashion. I need have no fear of not making the supreme effort - provided only that I am honest with myself and that I pay attention . The poet produces the beautiful b y fixing his attention o n something real . I t i s the same with the act o f love. T o know that this man who is hungry and thirsty really exists as much as I do - that is enough, the rest follows of itself. The authentic and pure values - truth, beauty and goodness - in the activity of a human being are the result of one and the same act, a certain application of the full attention to the object. Teaching should have no aim but to prepare, by training the attention, for the possibility of such an act . All the other advantages of instruction are without interest. Studies and faith. Prayer being only attention in its pure form and studies being a form of gymnastics of the attention, each school exercise should be a refraction of spiritual life . A ITENTION AND WILL 235 There must be method in it . A certain way of doing a Latin prose, a certain way of tackling a problem in geometry (and not just any way) make up a system of gymnastics of the attention calculated to give it a greater aptitude for prayer. Method for understanding images, symbols, etc. Not to try to interpret them, but to look at them till the light suddenly dawns. Generally speaking, a method for the exercise of the intelligence, which consists of looking. Application of this rule for the discrimination between the real and the illusory. In our sense perceptions, if we are not sure of what we see we change our position while looking, and what is real becomes evident. In the inner life, time takes the place of space. With time we are altered , and, if as we change we keep our gaze directed towards the same thing, in the end illusions are scattered and the real becomes visible. This is on condition that the attention be a looking and not an attachment. When a struggle goes on between the will attached to some obligation and a bad desire, there is a wearing away of the energy attached to good . We have to endure the biting of the desire passively, as we do a suffering which brings home to us our wretchedness, and we have to keep our attention turned towards the good. Then the quality of our energy is raised to a higher degree. We must steal away the energy from our desires by taking away from them their temporal orientation . Our desires are infinite in their pretensions but limited by the energy from which they proceed . That is why with the help of grace we can become their master and fi nally destroy them by attrition. As soon as this has been clearly understood, we have virtually conquered them, if we keep our attention in contact with this truth. Video meliora . . . In such states, it seems as though we were 236 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY thinking of the good, and in a sense we are doing so, but we are not thinking of its possibility. It is incontestable that the void which we grasp with the pincers of contradiction is from on high, for we grasp it the better the more we sharpen our natural faculties of intelligence, will and love. The void which is from below is that into which we fall when we allow our natural faculties to become atrophied. Experience of the transcendent : this seems contradictory , and yet the transcendent can be known only through contact since our faculties are unable to prevent it. Solitude. Where does its value lie ? For in solitude we are in the presence of mere matter (even the sky, the stars, the moon, trees in blossom), things of less value (perhaps) than a human spirit. Its value lies in the greater possibility of attention . If we could be attentive to the same degree in the presence of a human being. . . . We can only know one thing about God - that he is what we are not. Our wretchedness alone is an image of this. The more we contemplate it, the more we contemplate him. Sin is nothing else but the failure to recognize human wretchedness. It is unconscious wretchedness and for that very reason guilty wretchedness. The story of Christ is the experimental proof that human wretchedness is irreducible, that it is as great in the absolutely sinless man as in the sinner. B ut in him who is without sin it is enlightened . . . . The recognition of human wretchedness is difficult for whoever is rich and powerful because he is almost invincibly led to believe that he is something. It is equally difficult for the man in miserable circumstances because he is almost invincibly led to believe that the rich and powerful man is something. A TTENTION AND WILL 237 It is not the fault which constitutes mortal sin, but the degree of light in the soul when the fault, whatever it may be, is accomplished. Purity is the power to contemplate defilement . Extreme purity can contemplate both the pure and the impure : impurity can do neither : the pure frightens it, the impure absorbs it . It has to have a mixture . From Gravity and Grace , translated by Emma Craufurd, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1952. Originally published as La Pesanteur et Ia Grace, Pion, Paris, 1 947. THE POWE R O F WO R D S Simone Wei/ wrote this essay when she was twenty-five, during the year ofher retum from the Spanish Civil War. In that year, it was rumoured that Germany was sending troops into Morocco and a great stir ofjingoistic fury was created as a result in the French press. She wrote a scathing attack on French foreign policy pointing out the patent absurdity and falseness of the idea of 'protection ' not only in that part of North Afn'ca but in other parts of the globe as well. She was suffering very badly from her old headaches at the time and was eventually admitted to hospital on her way to Italy, which she was now longing to see. She had promised herself a treat there and memon'es of the trip were . to give her immense pleasure and consolation till the end of her life. She wrote angrily of surrealism that it was the literary and artistic equivalent to the sacking of a city. In this bn'lliant essay she produced a poweiful indictment of 'war based on no definable object'. The power of words such as 'national interest ' is the power of 'myths and monsters ' it is quite possible to destroy, provided the idea of limit is introduced and provided the idea of the victory of an absolute good over an equally illusory absolute evil is seen to be invalid. Earlier she had written: THE POWER OF WORDS 239 I predict . . . that we shall enter a period in which one will see throughout the country the most incredible absurdities - and they will appear natural. There will be less and less civilian lzfe. Military preoccupations will more and more dominate all the everyday aspects of existence . . . Later, she wrote: The efforl of expression has a bearing not only on the form but on the thought and on the whole inner being. So long as bare simplicity of expression is not attained, the thought has not touched or even come near to, true greatness . . . The real way of wn"ting is to u.n"te as we translate. When we translate a text wn"tten in some foreign language, we do not seek to add anything to it; on the contrary, we are scrupulously careful not to add anything to it. That is how we have to translate a text which is not wn·uen down. The relative security we enjoy in this age, thanks to a technology which gives us a measure of control over nature, is more than cancelled out by the dangers of destruction and massacre in conflicts between groups of men . 1 If the danger is grave it is no doubt partly because of the power of the destructive weapons supplied by our techniques ; but these weapons do not fire themselves, and it is dishonest to blame inert matter for a situation in which the entire responsibility is our own. Common to all our most threatening troubles is one characteristic which might appear reassuring to a super­ ficial eye, but which is in reality the great danger : they are conflicts with no definable objective . The whole of history bears witness that it is precisely such conflicts that are the most bitter. It may be that a clear recognition of this para­ dox is one of the keys to history ; that it is the key to our own period there is no doubt. In any struggle for a well-defined stake each combatant 1 This essay first appeared i n Nouveaux Cahiers , I and IS April 1 937, under the title: Ne recommem;ons pas Ia guerre de Troie . Simone Weil at one time held pacifist opinions, which may have influenced certain passages i n this essay. They do not appear in her writing after 1939 [R. Rees] . 240 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY can weigh the value of the stake against the probable cost of the struggle and decide how great an effort it justifies ; indeed , it is generally not difficult to arrive at a compromise which is more advantageous to both contending parties than even a successful battle. But when there is no objective there is no longer any common measure or proportion ; no balance or comparison of alternatives is possible, and com­ promise is inconceivable. In such circumstances the im­ portance of the battle can only be measured by the sacrifices it demands, and from this it follows that the sacrifices already incurred are a perpetual argument for new ones. Thus there would never be any reason to stop killing and dying, except that there is fortunately a limit to human endurance. This paradox is so extreme as to defy analysis. And yet the most perfect example of it is known to every so­ called educated man, but, by a sort of taboo, we read it without understanding. The Greeks and Trojans massacred one another for ten years on account of Helen . Not one of them except the dilettante warrior Paris cared two straws about her ; all of them agreed in wishing she had never been born. The person of Helen was so obviously out of scale with this gigantic struggle that in the eyes of all she was no more than the symbol of what was really at stake ; but the real issue was never defined by anyone, nor could it be, because it did not exist . For the same reason it could not be calculated . Its importance was simply imagined as corresponding to the deaths incurred and the further massacres expected ; and this implied an importance beyond all reckoning. H ector foresaw that his city would be destroyed , his father and brothers massacred, his wife degraded to a slavery worse than death ; Achilles knew that he was condemning his father to the miseries and humiliations of a defenceless old age ; all were aware that their long absence at the war would bring ruin on their homes ; yet no one felt that the cost was too great, because they were all in pursuit of a literal non­ entity whose only value was in the price paid for it. When the Greeks began to think of returning to their homes it THE POWER OF WORDS 241 seemed to Minerva and Ulysses that a reminder of the suf­ ferings of their dead comrades was a sufficient argument to put them to shame. They used, in fact, exactly the same arguments as three thousand years later were employed by Poincare to castigate the proposal for a negotiated peace. Nowadays the popular mind has an explanation for this sombre zeal in piling up useless ruin ; it imagines the machinations of economic interests. But there is no need to look so far. In the time of Homer's Greeks there were no organized bronze manufacturers or international cartels. The truth is that the role which we attribute to mysterious economic oligarchies was attributed by Homer's contem­ poraries to the gods of the Greek mythology. But there is no need of gods or conspiracies to make men rush headlong into the most absurd disasters. Human nature suffices . For the clear-sighted, there is no more distressing symptom of this truth than the unreal character of most of the con­ flicts that are taking place today. They have even less reality than the war between the Greeks and Trojans. At the heart of the Trojan War there was at least a woman and, what is more, a woman of perfect beauty. For our contemporaries the role of Helen is played by words with capital letters. I f w e grasp one o f these words, all swollen with blood and tears, and squeeze it, we find it is empty. Words with content and meaning are not murderous. If one of them occasionally becomes associated with bloodshed, it is rather by chance than by inevitability, and the resulting action is generally controlled and efficacious . But when empty words are given capital letters, then, on the slightest pretext, men will begin shedding blood for them and piling up ruin in their name, without effectively grasping anything to which they refer, since what they refer to can never have any reality, for the simple reason that they mean nothing. I n these conditions, the only definition o f success i s t o crush a rival group of men who have a hostile word on their banners ; for it is a characteristic of these empty words that each of them has its complementary antagonist. It is true, of course, that not all of these words are intrinsically meaningless ; 242 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY some of them do have meaning if one takes the trouble to define them properly. But when a word is properly defined it loses its capital letter and can no longer serve either as a banner or as a hostile slogan ; it becomes simply a sign, helping us to grasp some concrete reality or concrete objec­ tive, or method of activity. To clarify thought, to discredit the intrinsically meaningless words, and to define the use of others by precise analysis - to do this, strange though it may appear, might be a way of saving human lives. * Our age seems almost entirely unfitted for such a task. The glossy surface of our civilization hides a real intellectual decadence. There is no area in our minds reserved for superstition, such as the Greeks had in their mythology ; and superstition, under cover of an abstract vocabulary, has revenged itself by invading the entire realm of thought . Our science is like a store filled with the most subtle intellectual devices for solving the most complex problems, and yet we are almost incapable of applying the elementary principles of rational thought. In every sphere, we seem to have lost the very elements of intelligence : the ideas of limit, measure, degree, proportion, relation, comparison , contingency, interdependence, interrelation of means and ends. To keep to the social level, our political universe is peopled exclu­ sively by myths and monsters ; all it contains is absolutes and abstract entities. This is illustrated by all the words of our political and social vocabulary : nation, security, capital­ ism, communism, fascism, order, authority, property, democracy. We never use them in phrases such as : There is democracy to the extent that or: There is capitalism in so far as . . . The use of expressions like 'to the extent that' is beyond our intellectual capacity. Each of these words seems to represent for us an absolute reality, unaffected by conditions, or an absolute objective, independent of methods of action, or an absolute evil ; and at the same time we make all these words mean, successively or simultaneously, any­ thing whatsoever. Our lives are lived, in actual fact, among . . . THE POWER OF WORDS 243 changing, varying realities, subject to the casual play of external necessities, and modifying themselves according to specific conditions within specific limits ; and yet we act and strive and sacrifice ourselves and others by reference to fixed and isolated abstractions which cannot possibly be related either to one another or to any concrete facts. In this so-called age of technicians, the only battles we know how to fight are battles against windmills . So it is easy to find examples of lethal absurdity wherever one looks. The prime specimen is the antagonism between nations. People often try to explain this as a simple cover for capitalist rivalries ; but in so doing they ignore a glaringly obvious fact, namely, that the world-wide and complex system of capitalist rivalries and wars and alliances in no way corresponds to the world's division into nations. Two French groups, in the form of limited companies, for ex­ ample, may find themselves opposed to one another while each of them is in alliance with a German group . The German steel industry may be regarded with hostility by producers of steel goods in France ; but it makes little differ­ ence to the mining companies whether the iron of Lorraine is worked in France or Germany ; and the wine-growers, manufacturers of Parisian articles, and others have an interest in the prosperity of German industry. In the light of these elementary truths the current explanation of international rivalry breaks down. Whoever insists that nationalism is always a cover for capitalist greed should specify whose greed . The mining companies' ? The electricity companies' ? The steel magnates' ? The textile industry's ? The banks' ? It cannot be all of them, because their interests do not coin­ cide ; and if one is referring only to a minority of them , then one must show how it is that this minority has got control of the State . It is true that the policy of a State at any given moment always coincides with the interests of some sector of capitalism , and this offers an explanation whose very superficiality makes it applicable everywhere . But in view of the international circulation of capital it is not clear why a capitalist should look to his own State for protection rather 244 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY than to some foreign State, or why he should not find it as easy to use pressure and influence with foreign statesmen as with those of his own country. The world's economic structure coincides with its political structure only in so far as States exert their authority in economic affairs ; and, moreover, the way they use this authority is not explicable solely in terms of economic interest. If we examine the term 'national interest' we find it does not even mean the interest of capitalist business. 'A man thinks he is dying for his country , ' said Anatole France, 'but he is dying for a few industrialists. ' But even that is saying too much. What one dies for is not even so substantial and tangible as an industrialist . The national interest cannot be defined as a common interest of the great industrial, commercial, and financial companies of a country, because there is no such common interest ; nor can it be defined as the life, liberty, and well­ being of the citizens, because they are continually being adjured to sacrifice their well-being, their liberty, and their lives to the national interest. In the end , a study of modern history leads to the conclusion that the national interest of every State consists in its capacity to make war. In 1 9 1 1 France nearly went to war for Morocco ; but why was Morocco so important? Because the populations of North Africa would make a reserve of cannon fodder ; and be­ cause, for the purpose of war, a country needs to make its economy as self-supporting as possible in raw materials and markets . What a country calls its vital economic interests are not the things which enable its citizens to live, but the things which enable it to make war ; petrol is much more likely than wheat to be a cause of international conflict. Thus when war is waged it is for the purpose of safeguard­ ing or increasing one's capacity to make war. International politics are wholly involved in this vicious circle. What is called national prestige consists in behaving always in such a way as to demoralize other nations by giving them the impression that, if it comes to war, one would certainly defeat them. What is called national security is an imaginary THE POWER OF WORDS 245 state of affairs in which one would retain the capacity to make war while depriving all other countries of it . It amounts to this, that a self-respecting nation is ready for anything, including war, except for a renunciation of its option to make war. But why is it so essential to be able to make war? No one knows, any more than the Trojans knew why it was necessary for them to keep Helen. That is why the good intentions of peace-loving statesmen are so ineffec­ tual. If the countries were divided by a real opposition of interests, it would be possible to arrive at satisfactory com­ promises. But when economic and political interests have no meaning apart from war, how can they be peacefully reconciled ? It is the very concept of the nation that needs to be suppressed - or rather, the manner in which the word is used. For the word national and the expressions of which it forms part are empty of all meaning ; their only content is millions of corpses, and orphans, and disabled men , and tears and despair. * Another good example of murderous absurdity is the oppo­ sition between fascism and communism . The fact that this opposition constitutes today a double threat of civil war and world war is perhaps the gravest of all our symptoms of intellectual atrophy, because one has only to examine the present-day meaning of the two words to discover two almost identical political and social conceptions. In each of them the State seizes control of almost every department of individual and social life ; in each there is the same frenzied militarization, and the same artificial unanimity, obtained by coercion, in favour of a single party which identifies itself with the State and derives its character from this false identification, and finally there is the same serfdom im­ posed upon the working masses in place of the ordinary wage system . No two nations are more similar in structure than Germany and Russia, each threatening an inter­ national crusade against the other and each pretending to see the other as the Beast of the Apocalypse . Therefore one 246 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY can safely assert that the opposition between fascism and communism is strictly meaningless. Victory for fascism can only mean extermination of the communists and vic­ tory for communism extermination of the fascists . I n these circumstances i t follows, of course, that anti-fascism and anti-communism are also meaningless . The anti­ fascist position is this : Anything rather than fascism ; anything, including fascism, so long as it is labelled com­ munism . And the anti-communist position : Anything rather than communism ; anything, including communism, so long as it is labelled fascism. For such a noble cause everyone in either camp is resolved to die, and above all to kill. In Berlin , in the summer of 1 932, it was common to see a little group of people gather around two workmen or two petty bourgeois, one a communist and the other a Nazi, who were arguing. After a time it always became clear to both disputants that they were defending exactly the same programme ; and this made their heads swim, but it only exacerbated in each of them his hatred for an opponent separated from him by such a gulf as to remain an enemy even when expressing the same ideas. That was four and a half years ago ; the Nazis are still torturing German com­ munists in the concentration camps today, and it is possible that France is threatened with a war of extermination be­ tween anti-fascists and anti-communists. If such a war took place it would make the Trojan war look perfectly reasonable by comparison ; for even if the Greek poet was wrong who said that there was only Helen's phantom at Troy, a phantom Helen is a substantial reality compared to the distinction between fascism and communism . The distinction between dictatorship and democracy, however, which is related to that between order and free­ dom, is indeed an example of a real opposition. Neverthe­ less, it loses its meaning if we see each of the two terms as a thing-in-itself, as is usually done nowadays, instead of see­ ing it as a point of reference for judging the character of a social structure. It is clear that neither absolute dictatorship nor absolute democracy exists anywhere, and that every THE POWER OF WORDS 247 social organism everywhere is always a compound of demo­ cracy and dictatorship in different proportions ; it is clear, too , that the extent to which there is democracy is defined by the relations between different parts of the social mech­ anism and upon the conditions which control its function­ ing ; it is therefore upon these relations and these conditions that we should try to act. Instead of which we generally imagine that dictatorship or democracy are intrinsically in­ herent in certain groups of men, whether nations or parties, so that we become obsessed with the desire to crush one or other of these groups, according to whether we are tem­ peramentally more attached to order or to liberty. Many Frenchmen , for example, believe in all good faith that a military victory for France over Germany would be a vic­ tory for democracy. As they see it, freedom inheres in the French nation and tyranny in the German, in much the same way that for Moliere's contemporaries there was a dormitive virtue inherent in opium . If a day comes when the requirements of so-called 'na.tional defence' transform France into a fortified camp in which the whole nation is totally subjected to the military authority, and if this trans­ formed France goes to war with Germany, then these Frenchmen will allow themselves to be killed, having first killed as many Germans as possible, in the touching belief that their blood is being shed for democracy. It does not occur to them that dictatorship arose in Germany as the result of certain conditions and that an alteration of those conditions, in such a way as to make possible some relax­ ation of the State authority in Germany, might be more effective than killing the young men of Berlin and Hamburg. Another example : suppose one dared to suggest to any party man the idea of an armistice in Spain. If he is a man of the right he will indignantly reply that the fight must con­ tinue until the forces of order are triumphant and anarchy is crushed ; if he is a man of the left he will reply with equal indignation that the fight must continue until the people's freedom and well-being are assured and the oppressors and exploiters crushed . The man of the right forgets that no 248 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY political regime, of whatever kind, involves disorders re­ motely comparable to those of a civil war, with its deliberate destruction, its non-stop massacre in the firing-line, its slowing down of production, and the hundreds of crimes it permits every day, on both sides, by the fact that any hooligan can get hold of a gun . The man of the left, for his part, forgets that even on his own side liberty is suppressed far more drastically by the necessities of civil war than it would be by the coming to power of a party of the extreme right ; in other words, he forgets that there is a state of siege, that militarization is in force both at the front and behind it, that there is a police terror, and that the individual has no security and no protection against arbitrary injustice ; he forgets, too, that the cost of the war, and the ruin it causes, and the slowing down of production condemn the people to a long period of far more cruel privation than their ex­ ploiters would. And both of them forget that during the long months of civil war an almost identical regime has grown up on both sides. Each of them has unconsciously lost sight of his ideal and replaced it by an entity without substance. For each, the victory of what he still calls his idea can no longer mean anything except the extermination of the enemy ; and each of them will scorn any suggestion of peace, replying to it with the same knock-out argument as Minerva in Homer and Poincare in 1917 : 'The dead do not wish it . ' 1 * Of all the conflicts which set groups of men against one another the most legitimate and serious - one could perhaps say, the only serious one - is what is called today the class strnggle (an expression which needs clarifying) . But this is only true in so far as it is not confused by imaginary entities which obstruct controlled action, lead efforts astray, and entail the risk of ineradicable hatred, idiotic destructiveness, 1 Simone Wei! was one of the first foreign volunteers in the Spanish Civil War. She went to the Aragon front with the anarchist militia in August 1936 [R. Rees] . THE PQl.VER OF 'vVORDS 249 and senseless butchery . What is well founded , vital, and essential is the eternal struggle of those who obey against those who command when the mechanism of social power involves a disregard for the human dignity of the former. It is an eternal struggle because those who command are always inclined, whether they know it or not, to trample on the human dignity of those below them. The function of com­ mand cannot, except in special cases, be exercised in a way that respects the personal humanity of those who carry out orders. When exercised as though men were objects, and unresisting ones at that, it inevitably acts upon them as exceptionally pliable objects ; for a man exposed to the threat of death , which is really the final sanction of all authority, can become more pliable than inert matter. So long as there is a stable social hierarchy, of whatever form , those at the bottom must struggle so as not to lose all the rights of a human being. But the resistance of those at the top, although it usually appears unjust, is also inspired by concrete motives . First, personal motives ; for except in rather rare cases of generosity the privileged hate to lose any of their material and moral privileges . But there are also higher motives . To those in whom the functions of com­ mand are vested it seems to be their duty to defend order, without which no social life can survive ; and the only order they conceive is the existing one . Nor are they entirely wrong, for until a different order has been, in fact, established no one can say with certainty that it is possible . It is just for this reason that social progress depends upon a pressure from below sufficient to change effectively the relations of power and thus to compel the actual establishment of new social relationships. The tension between pressure from below and resistance from above creates and maintains an unstable equilibrium, which defines at each moment the structure of a society; This tension is a struggle but not a war ; and although it may in certain circumstances turn into a war, it does not inevitably do so. The story of the intermin­ able and useless massacres around Troy is not our only legacy from antiquity ; there is also the vigorous and concerted 250 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY action of the Roman plebeians, who, without shedding a drop of blood, escaped from a condition verging upon slavery and obtained the institution of tribunes to guarantee their new rights. In exactly the same way the French workers, by occupying the factories, without violence , en­ forced the recognition of certain elementary rights and obtained elected delegates to guarantee them. * But early Rome had one important advantage over modern France. In social matters she knew nothing of abstract entities, or words in capitals, or words ending in -ism ; nor any of those things which, with us, are liable to stultify the most serious efforts or to degrade the social struggle into a war as ruinous, as bloody, and as irrational in every way as a war between nations. On inspection, almost all the words and phrases of our political vocabulary turn out to be hollow . What, for example, can be the meaning of that slogan which was so popular at the recent elections - 'the fight against the trusts' ? A trust is an economic monopoly in the hands of financial powers, which is used by them not in the public interest but in such a way as to increase their own influence. What is it that is wrong about this ? The fact that a monopoly is serving as the instrument of a will-to-power uninterested in the public good . But it is not this fact that is attacked ; what is attacked is the fact, which is in itself morally indifferent, that the will-to-power belongs to an economic oligarchy. The aim is to replace economic oli­ garchies by the State, which has a will-to-power of its own and is quite as little concerned with the public good ; and a will-to-power, moreover, which is not economic but mili­ tary and therefore much more dangerous to any good folk who have a taste for staying alive. And on the bourgeois side what on earth is the sense of objecting to State control in economic affairs if one accepts private monopolies which have all the economic and technical disadvantages of State monopolies and possibly some others as well ? One could make a long list of pairs of complementary slogans of this THE PO\vER OF WORDS 25 1 kind, all of them equally unreal . The two considered above are relatively harmless, but this is not true of all of them . * For example , whatever can be in the heads of those for whom the word 'capitalism' signifies the absolute of evi l ? The society i n which we live includes forms o f coercion and oppression by which those who suffer from them are all too often overwhelmed ; it includes the most grievous inequal­ ities and unnecessary miseries . On the other hand, the economic character of this society consists in certain methods of production, consumption, and exchange, which are continually varying, however, and which depend upon certain fundamental relationships : between the production and the circulation of goods, between the circulation of goods and money, between money and production, be­ tween money and consumption . This whole interplay of varied and changing economic phenomena is arbitrarily converted into an abstraction, which defies all definition , and is then made responsible, under the name of capitalism , for every hardship endured by oneself or others. After that, it is only natural that any man of character should devote his life to the destruction of capitalism, or rather (it comes to the same thing) to revolution - for this negative meaning is the only one possessed today by the word revolution. Since the 'destruction of capitalism' has no meaning capitalism being an abstraction - and since it does not refer to any precise modifications that might be applied to the regime (such modifications are contemptuously dismissed as 'reforms') , the slogan can only imply the destruction of capitalists and , more generally, of everyone who does not call himself an opponent of capitalism . Apparently it is easier to kill , and even to die , than to ask ourselves a few quite simple questions like the following : Can the laws and conventions which control our present economic life be said to constitute a system ? To what extent is this or that feature of our economic life necessarily connected with the others ? To what extent would the modification of this or that 252 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY economic law produce repercussions among the others ? How far can the ills arising from the social relations which exist today be attributed to this or that convention and how far are they attributable to the totality of conventions of our economic life ? How far are they attributable to other fac­ tors, either permanent factors which would persist after the transformation of the economic system or, on the contrary, factors which could be eliminated without putting an end to what is called the regime ? What kind of hardships, either transitory or permanent, would necessarily be involved by the chosen method for transforming the regime ? What new hardships might be introduced by the proposed new organi­ zation of society ? If we gave serious thought to these prob­ lems we might reach the point where we could give some meaning to the assertion that capitalism is an evil ; but we should mean only a relative evil, and the proposal to trans­ form the regime would be only for the purpose of substitut­ ing a lesser evil. And the proposed transformation would be a clearly defined and limited one . * The same criticism is applicable in its entirety to those in the opposite camp, except that the concern for maintaining order replaces the concern about the sufferings of the de­ pressed social classes and the instinct of conservation re­ places the desire for change. The bourgeois always tend to regard anyone who wishes to put an end to capitalism , and sometimes even anyone who wants to reform it, as an agent of disorder ; and they do so because they are ignorant as to what extent and in what circumstances the various econo­ mic relations, which are subsumed today under the general name of capitalism, are factors in preserving order. Many of them are in favour of changing nothing, because they do not know what modifications of the system may or may not be dangerous ; they fail to realize that, since conditions are always changing, the refusal to modify the system is itself a modification which may be productive of disorders. Most of them appeal to economic laws as religiously as if they were THE POWER OF WORDS 253 the unwritten laws invoked by Antigone, and this although they can see them changing day by day in front of their eyes. The preservation of the capitalist regime is a meaning­ less expression, in their mouths, because they do not know what ought to be preserved, nor how much of it ; all they can mean, in practice, is the suppression of everyone who wants to put an end to the regime. The struggle between the opponents and the defenders of capitalism is a struggle between innovators who do not know what innovation to make and conservatives who do not know what to conserve ; it is a battle of blind men struggling in a void, and for that very reason it is liable to become a war of extermination. The same situation exists on a smaller scale in the struggle within any industrial firm. In general, the worker instinc­ tively blames his employer for all the hardships of work in a factory ; he does not ask himself whether under any other property system the management would not inflict some of the same hardships on him, or indeed exactly the same ones, or even perhaps some worse ones ; nor does he ask himself how many of these hardships might be abolished , by abolishing their causes, without any alteration of the existing property system . He identifies the struggle 'against the boss' with the undying protest of the human being oppressed by too many hardships . The head of the firm, for his part, is rightly concerned to maintain his authority. But his authority is strictly limited to overall direction, to the due co-ordination of the branches of production, and to ensuring, with some compulsion if necessary, that the work is properly executed . Any industrial regime, of whatever kind, in which these functions of co-ordination and control can be effectively exercised is allowing sufficient authority to the heads of the firms . But the feeling of authority, in these men's minds, is especially connected with a certain atmosphere of deference and subservience which has no necessary connection with a high standard of work ; and , above all , when they become aware of latent or overt oppo­ sition among their personnel they always attribute it to certain individuals, whereas in reality a spirit of revolt, 254 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY whether loud or silent, aggressive or despairing, is always present wherever life is physically or morally oppressive . I n the worker's mind the struggle 'against the boss' i s confused with the assertion of human dignity, and in the manager's mind the struggle against the 'ringleaders' is confused with his duty to the job and his professional conscience. Both of them are tilting at windmills, so their efforts cannot be confined to reasonable objectives. When strikes are under­ taken for clearly defined claims a settlement is attainable without too great difficulty, as we have sometimes seen ; but we have also seen strikes which resembled wars, in the sense that neither side had any objective, strikes in which there were no real or tangible issues - apart from arrested produc­ tion, deteriorating machines, destitution, want, weeping women, and hungry children ; and such bitterness on both sides that any agreement seemed impossible. In events like these there are the seeds of civil war. * If we analysed in this way all the words and formulas which have served throughout history to call forth the spirit of self-sacrifice and cruelty combined , we should doubtless discover them all to be just as empty. And yet, all these bloodthirsty abstractions must have some sort of connection with real life ; and indeed they have . It may be that there was only Helen's phantom at Troy, but the Greek and Trojan armies were not phantoms ; and in the same way although there is no meaning in the word nation and the slogans in which it occurs, the different States with their offices, prisons, arsenals, barracks, and customs are real enough . The theoretical distinction between the two forms of totalitarian regime, fascism and communism, is imagi­ nary, but in Germany in 1932 there existed very concretely two political organizations each of which wanted to achieve complete power and consequently to exterminate the other. A democratic party may gradually change into a party of dictatorship but it still remains distinct from the dictatorial party it is striving to suppress. France, for the purpose of THE PmVER OF WORDS 255 defence against Germany, may submit in her turn to a totalitarian regime, but the French State and the German State will not cease to be two separate States . Both the destruction and the preservation of capitalism are meaning­ less slogans, but these slogans are supported by real organi­ zations . Corresponding to each empty abstraction there is an actual human group, and any abstraction of which this is not true remains harmless. Conversely, any group wich has not secreted an abstract entity will probably not be danger­ ous . This particular kind of secretion is superbly illustrated by the 'Dr Knock' of Jules Romains with his maxim : 'Above the interest of the patient and the interest of the doctor stands the interest of Medicine . ' It is pure comedy, because the medical profession has not so far secreted such an en­ tity ; it is always by organizations concerned with guarding or acquiring power that these entities are secreted . All the absurdities which make history look like a prolonged de­ lirium have their root in one essential absurdity, which is the nature of power. The necessity for power is obvious, because life cannot be lived without order ; but the alloca­ tion of power is arbitrary because all men are alike, or very nearly. Yet power must not seem to be arbitrarily allocated, because it will not then be recognized as power. Therefore prestige, which is illusion, is of the very essence of power. All power is based , in fact, upon the interrelation of human activities ; but in order to be stable it must appear as some­ thing absolute and sacrosanct, both to those who wield and those who submit to it and also to other external powers . The conditions which ensure order are essentially contra­ dictory, and men seem to be compelled to choose between the anarchy which goes with inadequate power and the wars of every kind which go with the preoccupation of prestige. All the absurdities we have enumerated cease to appear absurd when translated into the language of power. Is it not natural that every State should define the national interest as the capacity to make war, when it is surrounded by States capable of subduing it by arms if it is weak ? One must either join the race to prepare for war or else be resigned to 256 SIMONE WE/L - AN ANTHOLOGY enduring whatever some other armed State may choose to inflict ; no third choice seems possible. Nothing but com­ plete and universal disarmament could resolve this di­ lemma, and that is hardly conceivable. And, further, a State cannot appear weak in its external relations without t he risk of weakening its authority with its own subjects. If Priam and Hector had delivered Helen to the Greeks this might merely have increased the Greeks' inclination to sack a town that seemed so ill prepared to defend itself ; and they would also have risked a general uprising in Troy - not because the Trojans would have been upset by the surren­ der of Helen, but because it would have suggested to them that their chiefs could not be so very powerful . In Spain, if one of the two sides gave the impression of wanting peace this would first have the effect of encouraging its enemies and stimulating their aggressiveness, and then it would involve the risk of uprisings among its own supporters. Again, for a man who is outside both the anti-communist and the anti-fascist blocs the clash between two almost identical ideologies may appear ridiculous ; but since these two blocs exist the members of one of them are bound to see absolute evil in the other, because it will exterminate them if they are the weaker. The leaders on each side must seem prepared to annihilate the enemy, in order to maintain their authority with their own troops ; and once these blocs have achieved a certain degree of power, neutrality becomes an almost untenable position . In the same way, when those at the bottom of any social hierarchy begin to fear that unless they dispossess those above them they will be completely crushed , then, so soon as either side becomes strong enough to have nothing to fear, it will yield to the intoxication of power mixed with spite. Power, in general, is always essen­ tially vulnerable ; and therefore it is bound to defend itself, for otherwise society would lack the necessary minimum of stability. But it is nearly always believed, with or without reason, by all parties, that the only defence is attack. And it is natural that the most implacable conflicts should arise out of imaginary disputes, because these take place solely on the THE POWER OF WORDS 257 level of power and prestige. It would probably be easier for France to cede raw materials to Germany than a few acres of ground with the title of 'colony', and easier for Germany to do without raw materials than without the title of 'col­ onial power'. The essential contradiction in human society is that every social status quo rests upon an equilibrium of forces or pressures, similar to the equilibrium of fluids ; but between one prestige and another there can be no equilib­ rium . Prestige has no bounds and its satisfaction always involves the infringement of someone else's prestige or dig­ nity. And prestige is inseparable from power. This seems to be an impasse from which humanity can only escape by some miracle. But human life is made up of miracles. Who would believe that a Gothic cathedral could remain stand­ ing if we did not see it every day ? Since the state of war is not, in fact, continuous, · it is not impossible that peace might continue indefinitely. Once all the real data of a problem have been revealed the problem is well on the way to solution. The problem of peace, both international and social , has never yet been completely stated . * What prevents us from seeing the data of the problem is the swarm of vacuous entities or abstractions ; they even pre­ vent us from seeing that there is a problem to be solved , instead of a fatality to be endured. They stupefy the mind ; they not only make men willing to die but, infinitely worse , they make them forget the value of life. To sweep away these entities from every department of political and social life is an urgently necessary measure of public hygiene . But the operation is not an easy one ; the whole intellectual climate of our age favours the growth and multiplication of vacuous entities. Perhaps we should begin with a reform of our methods of scientific education and popularization, abolishing the artificial vocabulary which those methods crudely and superstitiously encourage . By reviving the intelligent use of expressions like to the extent that, in so far as, on condition that, in relation to , and by discrediting all 258 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY those vicious arguments which amount to proclaiming the dormitive virtue of opium, we might be rendering a highly important practical service to our contemporaries. A gen­ eral raising of the intellectual level would greatly assist any educational attempt to deflate the imaginary causes of strife . As things are, there is certainly no shortage of preachers of appeasement in every sphere ; but their sermons, as a rule, are not intended to awaken intelligence and eliminate unreal conflicts, but rather, by inducing somnolence, to obscure real conflicts. There are no more dangerous enemies of international and social peace than those spell-binders whose talk about peace between nations means simply an indefinite prolongation of the status quo for the exclusive advantage of the French State or those whose advocacy of social peace presupposes the safeguarding of privilege, or at least the right of the privileged to veto any change they dislike. The relations between social forces are essentially variable, and the underprivileged will always seek to alter them ; it is wrong to enforce an artificial stabilization. What is required is discrimination between the imaginary and the real , so as to diminish the risks of war, without interfering with the struggle between forces which , according to Heraclitus, is the condition of life itself. From Selected Essays 1 934-43 by Simone Wei/, chosen and translated by Richard Rees, Oxford University Press, London, 1 962. C O N TRAD I C TI O N he contradictions the mind comes up against - these T are the only realities : they are the criterion of the real. There is no contradiction in what is imaginary. Contradiction is the test of necessity. Contradiction experienced to the very depths of the being tears us heart and soul : it is the cross. When the attention has revealed the contradiction i n something o n which i t has been fixed, a kind o f loosening takes place. By persevering in this course we attain detachment. The demonstrable correlation of opposites is an image of the transcendental correlation of contradictories. All true good carries with it conditions which are contradictory and as a consequence is impossible. He who keeps his attention really fixed on this impossibility and acts will do what is good. In the same way all truth contains a contradiction . Contradiction is the point of the pyramid. 260 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY The word good has not the same meaning when it is a term of the correlation good-evil as when it describes the very being of God . The existence of opposite virtues in the souls of the saints : the metaphor of climbing corresponds to this. If I am walking on the side of a mountain I can see first a lake, then, after a few steps, a forest . I have to choose either the lake or the forest. If I want to see both lake and forest at once, I have to climb higher. Only the mountain does not exist . It is made of air. One cannot go up : it is necessary to be drawn. An expen.mental ontological proof. I have not the principle of rising in me . I cannot climb to heaven through the air. It is only by directing my thoughts towards something better than myself that I am drawn upwards by this something. I f I a m really raised u p , this something i s real. No imaginary perfection can draw me upwards even by the fraction of an inch . For an imaginary perfection is automatically at the same level as I who imagine it - neither higher nor lower. What is thus brought about by thought direction is in no way comparable to suggestion. If I say to myself every morning : 'I am courageous, I am not afraid', I may become courageous but with a courage which conforms to what, in my present imperfection, I imagine under that name, and accordingly my courage will not go beyond this imperfection. It can only be a modification on the same plane, not a change of plane. Contradiction is the criterion. We cannot by suggestion obtain things which are incompatible. Only grace can do that. A sensitive person who by suggestion becomes courageous hardens himself ; often he may even, by a sort of savage pleasure, amputate his own sensitivity. Grace alone can give courage while leaving the sensitivity intact, or sensitivity while leaving the courage intact. Man's great affliction, which begins with infancy and CONTR4DICTJON 26 1 accompanies him till death, is that looking and eating are two different operations . Eternal beatitude is a state where to look is to eat. That which we look at here below is not real, lt IS a mere setting. That which we eat is destroyed, it is no longer real . Sin has brought thiE. separation about in us. The natural virtues, if we give the word virtue its authentic meaning, that is to say if we exclude the social imitations of virtue, are only possible as permanent attributes for someone who has supernatural grace within him. Their duration is supernatural . Opposites and contradictories . What the relation of opposites can do in the approach to the natural being, the unifying grasp of contradictory ideas can do in the approach to God. A man inspired by God is a man who has ways of behaviour, thoughts and feelings which are bound together by a bond impossible to define. Pythagorean idea : the good is always defined by the union of opposites . When we recommend the opposite of an evil we remain on the level of that evil. After we have put it to the test, we return to the evil . That is what the Gita calls 'the aberration of opposites'. Marxist dialectic is based on a very degraded and completely warped view of this. A wrong union of contraries. The imperialism of the working class developed by Marxism . Latin proverbs concerning the insolence of newly-freed slaves. Insolence and servility are aggravated by each other. Sincere anarchists, discerning, as through a mist, the principle of the union of opposites, thought that evil could be destroyed by giving power to the oppressed . An impossible dream . What then differentiates the right from the wrong union of opposites [?] Bad union of opposites (bad because fallacious) is that 262 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY which is achieved on the same plane as the opposites . Thus the granting of domination to the oppressed. In this way we do not get free from the oppression-domination cycle. The right union of opposites is achieved on a higher plane . Thus the opposition between domination and oppression is smoothed out on the level of the law - which is balance. In the same way suffering (and this is its special function) separates the opposites which have been united in order to unite them again on a higher plane than that of their first union . The pulsation of sorrow-joy. But, mathematically, joy always triumphs. Suffering is violence, joy is gentleness, but joy is the stronger. The union of contradictories involves a wrenching apart. It is impossible without extreme suffering. The correlation of contradictories is detachment. An attachment to a particular thing can only be destroyed by an attachment which is incompatible with it. That explains : 'Love your enemies . . . . He who hateth not his father and mother . . . Either we have made the contraries submissive to us or we have submitted to the contraries. ' Simultaneous existence of incompatible things in the soul's bearing ; balance which leans both ways at once : that is saintliness, the actual realization of the microcosm , the imitation of the order of the world . The simultaneous existence o f opposite virtues in the soul like pincers to catch hold of God. We have to find out and formulate certain general laws relating to man's condition, concerning which many profound observations throw light on particular cases. Thus : that which is in every way superior reproduces that which is in every way inferior, but transposed. CONTRADICTION 263 Relationships of evil to strength and to being ; and of good to weakness or nothingness. Yet at the same time evil is privation . We have to elucidate the way contradictories have of being true. Method of investigation : as soon as we have thought something, try to see in what way the contrary is true. 1 Evil is the shadow of good . All real good, possessing solidity and thickness, projects evil. Only imaginary good does not project it. As all good is attached to evil, if we desire the good and do not wish to spread the corresponding evil round us we are obliged, since we cannot avoid this evil, to concentrate it on ourselves. Thus the desire for utterly pure good involves the acceptance of the last degree of affliction for ourselves. If we desire nothing but good , we are opposing the law which links real good to evil as the object in the light is linked to its shadow, and, being opposed to one of the world's universal laws, it is inevitable that we should fall into affliction. The mystery of the cross of Christ lies in a contradiction, for it is both a free-will offering and a punishment which he endured in spite of himself. If we only saw in it an offering, we might wish for a like fate . But we are unable to wish for a punishment endured in spite of ourselves. From Gravity and Grace , translated by Emma Craufurd, Routledge and Kegan Pau l , London, 1952. Originally published as La Pesanteur et La Grace, Pion, Paris, 1 947 . 1 This aphorism gives us the key to the apparent contradictions scattered throughout the work of Simone Wei ! : love of tradition and detachment from the past, God conceived of as the supreme reality and as nothingness, etc. These contradictory ideas are true on different planes of existence and their opposition is smoothed out on the level of supernatural love. Reason discerns the two ends of the chain but the centre which unites them is only accessible to undemonstrable intuition. [Gustave Thibon] P R E R E QU I S I T E TO D I G N I TY O F LAB OU R @ This essay was written in Marseille in 1 941 . Part of it appeared in Cheval de Troie in 194 7 and it is now included in the collection made by Albertine Thevenon of Simone Weil's wn"tings about her factory expen"ence. The same collection, La Condition Ouvriere contains Simone Weil's journal and the notes she made after her day 's work in the Renault, Alsthom and Basse-Indres Forges factories in Paris. In it she argues against the so-called 'rationalization ' or 'taylon"zation ' of labour, which reduces the worker to a series ofgestures unconnected with reality. It dates from the pen.od dun"ng which Simone Weil had become increasingly engaged in her struggle with the Chn"stian church and con­ trasts vividly with articles wn"tten closer to the time of her employment in the factories, for example 'La vie et la greve des ouvrieres metallos'. There is in all manual work and all work performed to order, that's to say in all real labour, an ineradicable ele­ ment of constraint which would exist in even the most equitable of societies. The reason is that such work is governed by necessity and not by purpose . It is performed not for a result but because of a need , 'since you've got to PREREQUISITE TO DIGNITY OF LABOUR 265 make a living' as people say whose existence is spent doing just that . It means exerting effort whose sole end is to secure no more than what one already has, whil� failure to exert such effort results in losing it . But in human effort, the only source of energy is desire. It is not in a person's nature to desire what he already has. Desire is a tendency, the start of a movement towards something, towards a point from which one is absent. If, at the very outset, this move­ ment doubles back on itself towards its point of departure, a person turns round and round like a squirrel in a cage or a prisoner in a condemned cell . Constant turning soon pro­ duces revulsion . All workers, especially though not ex­ clusively those who work under inhumane conditions, are easily the victims of revulsion , exhaustion and disgust and the strongest are often the worst affected . Existence i s not a n end i n itself but merely the framework upon which all good , both real and imagined, may be built. When all objectives vanish and existence appears starkly stripped of everything, it no longer bears any relation to what is good . Indeed it becomes evil. And it is precisely then , when existence is substituted for all absent ends, that it becomes an end in itself, the only object of desire. When desire is directed like that towards sheer naked evil, the soul lives in the same horror as when violent death is imminent. I n the past, that state could last an entire lifetime, as for example when a man disarmed by his enemy's sword found his li fe spared . In exchange for his life he would exhaust all his energies all day, every day, as a slave, with nothing on which to pin his hopes. except the possibility of not being whipped or not being killed. The only good objective for him was existence itself. The ancients used to say that the day a man became a slave half his soul was taken from him. A similar kind of slavery persists whenever people find themselves in the same position on the first and the last day of a month , of a year, or of twenty years' effort. The similarity lies in its being equally impossible for them to desire more than they already possess or to direct effort towards the acquisition of what is good. Effort is for survival. 266 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY The unit of time is a day and they oscillate like a ball bouncing off two walls, from work to sleep, working so as to eat, eating so as to continue to work and so on ad nauseam . I n this sort of existence, everything is an intermediary, a means from which all finality is excluded. The manufac­ tured object is a means. It will be sold. Who could invest in it his or her idea of the good? Material objects, tools, the worker's body and even his soul are a means of manufactur­ ing. Necessity is omnipresent, good nowhere. This is the sole reason for people's present loss of morale. It is the unchanging, essential working condition . We must look for the reasons why in the past there has been no similar demoralization. The emptiness of such a life is only bearable either through enormous physical strength, in which effort is scarcely perceived, or through total moral paralysis. In the absence of these, compensations are necessary. One is the hope, either for oneself or for one's children, of occupying a different position in society. Another, of the same sort, is mindless pleasure or violence . In both, illusion is substi­ tuted for objective. On Sunday, for example, people want to forget that they have to work, so they dress and spend as though they did not . Vanity has to be satisfied and illusions of power easily procured by abandon. Enjoyments of this sort act like a drug and drugs are always a temptation to those who are suffering. Revolution itself is a similar sort of compensation . It is ambition transposed to the collective level , the wild ambition that all workers shall soar above the working condition itself. Most revolutionary feeling, though initially a revolt against injustice, often becomes very rapidly as it has done in the past, a workers' imperialism exactly analogous to national imperialism. Its aim is the total and unlimited domination of one collectivity over all humanity and all aspc�ts of human life. The absurdity of it lies in the fact that under such a regime, the dominators, being themselves workers, would be unable to dominate. As a revolt against the injustices of society, the idea of revolution is right and PREREQUISITE TO DIGN/1Y OF LABOUR 267 proper. But as a revolt against the essential misery of the working condition it is misleading, for no revolution will get rid of the latter. Belief in revolution holds the greater sway, however, since the misery of the working condition is more keenly felt than injustice itself. In people's minds the one is rarely distinguished from the other. The phrase 'opium of the people' which Marx used appropriately enough to describe religion when it had failed itself, applies essentially to revolution. The hope of a revolution to come satisfies a craving for adventure, of escaping from necessity, which again is a reaction against misery. In adolescence this same craving is shown in a taste for crime fiction and a tendency towards delinquency . It was naive of the bourgeoisie to believe that all would be well if they transferred to the people the principle that governs the middle classes, namely the acquisition of wealth . They did as much as they could in this direction by introducing piece-work and extending ex­ change between urban and rural areas . But all that did was increase dissatisfaction to the level of dangerous frustration , and the reason was simple. The acquisition of money as the object of desire and effort cannot take place under condi­ tions within which it is impossible to become enriched. A small industrialist or businessman may enrich himself and become a big industrialist or a big businessman ; a teacher, a writer or a minister is rich or poor according to circum­ stance but a worker who becomes rich ceases to be a worker and the same is nearly always true of a peasant. A worker cannot be smitten by the desire for money without wishing to escape, either with or without his companions, from the working condition. The workers' universe excludes purpose. Purpose does not penetrate it except for very short periods always regarded as exceptional . The rapid development of new countries such as the US and the U S S R produces change at such a rate that from one day to the next it seems there are fresh expectations, more and more thi ngs to desire and to covet. This frenzied social reconstruction was the great 268 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY attraction of Russian communism, by coincidence as it happened, since it had to do with the economic state of the country and not with revolution or Marxist doctrine. When a system of metaphysics is based on brief, temporary and ex;ceptional circumstances, as in the case of the American and the Russian, it is ill-founded. The family acquires purpose in the form of children to be brought up . B ut unless one aspires on their behalf to a different social posi­ tion - rare as these social advances are - the prospect of children condemned to the same existence provides no re­ lief from its painful emptiness. This emptiness weighs heavily and it is felt and suffered by many of low intelli­ gence and little culture. Those whose position in society protects them from it cannot judge fairly the actions of those who bear it all their lives. It does not kill but is perhaps as painful as hunger, possibly more painful. It might be literally true that bread is less necessary than the relief of such pain. There is one form of relief and one only. Only one thing makes monotony bearable and that is beauty, the light of the eternal . It is in respect of one thing only that human nature can bear for the soul's desire to be directed towards not what could be or will be, but towards what exists, and that is in respect of beauty. Everything beautiful is the object of desire but one desires that it be not otherwise, that it be unchanged, that it be exactly what it is. One looks with desire at a clear starry night and one desires exactly the sight before one's eyes. Since the people are forced to direct all their desires towards what they already possess, beauty is made for them and they for it. For other social classes, poetry is a luxury but the people need poetry as they need bread. Not the poetry closed inside words : by itself that is no use to them. They need poetry to be the very substance of daily life . Such poetry can come from one source only and that is God. The poetry can only be religion. There is no stratagem , no procedure, no reform or reversal whereby purpose can enter the world in which workers are placed by the working condition itself. But this entire world may be PREREQUISITE TO DIGNITY OF LABOUR 269 connected to the one true purpose . It may be linked to God. The condition of the workers is one in which the hunger for purpose that is the very being of all people cannot be satisfied except by God . And it is their exclusive privilege . They alone possess it . In all other conditions of life, with­ out exception , specific aims govern activity. And there is not a single aim, including the salvation of one or many souls, which may not act as a screen and hide God. The screen must be pierced through detachment. For workers there is no screen . Nothing separates them from God. They have only to lift their heads. Therein lies the greatest difficulty for them . Unlike other people they do not have too much of something which must be shed with effort. They have too little of something. They have too few inter­ mediaries. Asking people to think of God and to offer him their pain and suffering is no help at all. People go to church specifically to pray, yet we know they could not do so unless their attention were drawn through intermediaries towards God . The architecture of the church itself, the images which fill it, the words of the liturgy and prayer, the ritual gestures of the priest are all intermediaries . By fixing attention on them it is guided towards God . How much more necessary then is the provi­ sion of such intermediaries in a place where someone goes merely to make a living ! In the workplace all thought is dragged down to earth. It is clearly not possible to put up religious pictures and suggest people look at them or recite prayers while working. The only perceptible objects of attention there are the materials, the tools and the move­ ments of work. If these very objects are not transformed into reflections of light, it is impossible for attention during work to be directed towards the source of all light. Nothing is more urgently needed than such a transformation. It is only possible if a reflective property is to be found in the matter that confronts working people. No concoction of arbitrary symbols will do . In truth there is no place for fiction , imagination or dreams. Fortunately for us a reflec­ tive property does exist in matter which is like a mirror 270 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY misted over by our breath. We have only to wipe the mirror to read in it symbols inscribed in matter through eternity. Some are contained in the Gospels. I nside a room , if one wishes to think about spiritual death being a prerequisite of true rebirth , one needs words about the seed fertilized by death alone . A sower in the act of sowing, however, may, if he wishes, through his own movements and the sight of the seed entering the earth, direct his attention towards that truth without the help of a single word. If he does not reason around it but simply looks, the undiminished atten­ tion he pays to the accomplishment of his task reaches the very highest degree of intensity. Religious attention is justly called the plenitude of atten­ tion. Plenitude of attention is nothing other than prayer. Similarly, the image of the alienation of the soul parched by Christ is like the shrivelling of the branch cut off from the vine. In the great vineyards, pruning takes place over very many days. And likewise, contemplation of the inexhaus­ tible truth it symbolizes can also continue day after day. It should be easy to find shaped in the nature of things many other symbols which can transfigure not only labour generally but individual tasks themselves. Christ is the bronze serpent which shields from death those who look upon it. Yet our gaze must be uninterrupted and in order for it to be so, the things which our needs and obligations force us to look at must reflect what they prevent us from seeing directly. If a church made by human beings can be full of symbols, how much more full must the universe be. It is infinitely full of them . We must read into them. The image in the Good Friday hymn of the Cross com­ pared to a scales could be an inexhaustible source of inspira­ tion to those who carry burdens, pull levers and who are by evening exhausted by the weight of things . On the scales a considerable weight placed close to the supporting point may be lifted by a relatively small weight placed at a great distance from it . The body of Christ was a very small weight but with the distance existing between heaven and earth, he counterbalanced the universe. It is often unbearably PREREQ UISITE TO DIGNITY OF LABOUR 27 1 heavy, and body and soul are bowed beneath its wearying weight . But the person who is connected to heaven may support that weight, and once he has seen the connection , will not be distracted from it by weariness, tedium or dis­ gust. He will be led back to it constantly. I n the fields, sun and sap are constant reminders of the greatest thing in the world - the fact that we live by solar energy alone. It feeds us, keeps us upright, activates our muscles and operates all our bodily actions. In its different forms it is perhaps the only thing in the universe to act as a countervailing force to gravity. It is through it that trees rise, our arms lift burdens and our motor power is driven . It comes from a source inaccessible to us and towards which we cannot move a single step. It flows down towards us always, and though bathed in it we can never seize it. Only the chlorophyll in plant life can capture it, to make with it our food . Provided that by our efforts the earth is properly prepared, solar energy through chlorophyll becomes solid and enters into us in bread , wine, oil and fruit. All peasant labour consists in the tending of this power in plants, which is a perfect image of Christ. The laws of mechanics that derive from geometry and govern our machines contain supernatural truths. The oscillation of alternating motion is an image of the earthly condition. Everything belonging to creatures is limited ex­ cept the desire within us which is the mark of our origin . The yearnings which make u s seek the unlimited here on earth are therefore for us the only source of crime and error. The good contained in things is finite and so is the evil . I n a general way, a given cause will produce a given effect up to a certain point beyond which, if it continues to act , the effect is reversed . It is God who imposes limit on all things and by whom the sea is bounded . In God, there is but one eternal , unchanging act which , rebounding on itself, has no object outside itself. In creatures there exist only move­ ments directed outside themselves but which, because of their limits, are constrained to oscillate. This oscillation is a pale reflection of exclusively divine self-orientation . In our 272 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY machines, the image of this link is that between circular and alternating motion. The circle is also the source of mean proportionals. There is no other perfectly exact way of finding the mean proportional between a unit and a number which is not a square than by drawing a circle. The num­ bers incommensurable with the unit [les nombres pour lesquels il n 'existe aucune mediation qui les relie naturelle­ ment a / 'unite] provide an image of our misery. The circle, which comes from outside in a manner which is transcen­ dental with respect to the domain of numbers and provides the mean, is the image of the sole remedy for that misery. These truths and many others are contained in the simple image of a pulley determining the oscillating motion . Only the most elementary knowledge of geometry is needed to understand these last truths and the very rhythm of work, corresponding as it does to oscillation, helps the body to sense them. A human life-span is a very short time indeed in which to contemplate them. Many other symbols could be found, some more inti­ mately linked with individual workers' actions. In some cases merely by applying his attitude at work to everything else, a worker could experience the good life. Symbols might also be found for those with routine non-manual jobs. For clerks, these might come from elementary arith­ metic, for cashiers, from money and so forth ; the stock is inexhaustible. From then on, much could be accomplished. These great images, linked to the ideas of science and general culture, could be passed on to adolescents as part of their studies. They could be used as themes for their cele­ brations and theatrical ventures. New high days and holi­ days could be centred around them, such as the eve of that great day when a little fourteen-year-old goes to work alone for the first time. By means of these symbols, men and women could live constantly surrounded by an atmosphere of supernatural poetry, as they did in medieval times, perhaps even better than then, for why limit hope for the good ? I n this way workers would be rid of the often painful PREREQUISITE TO DIGNIT'r' OF LABOUR 273 feeling of inferiority they experience and also the false con­ fidence which slight contact with intellectualism puts in its place. I ntellectuals, for their part, would be rid of their unwarranted snobbery and the equally suspect cult of fashionable ranting that sprang up a few years ago. All those who were able would unite on equal terms at the highest point of full attention, that's to say in the fullness of prayer. Those who were unable would at least know that such a point exists. They would see that the various paths leading up to that point, though separate at lower levels, as by the base of a mountain are all equally viable. The only serious aim of schoolwork is to train the atten­ tion. Attention is the only faculty of the soul which gives access to God . Mental gymnastics rely on an inferior, dis­ cursive form of attention, which reasons. Properly directed, however, this attention may give rise in the soul to another, of the highest kind, which is intuitive attention . Pure, intui­ tive attention is the only source of perfectly beautiful art, truly original and brilliant scientific discovery, of philo­ sophy which really aspires to wisdom and of true, practical love of one's neighbour. This kind of attention when turned to God is true prayer. Just as symbols can enable one to think of God while one is digging or mowing, so only a method of transforming schoolwork into preparation for this superior attention would allow an adolescent solving a problem in geometry or doing a Latin translation to think of God . Without such a transformation , intellectual work for all its apparent independence remains nevertheless servile . In order to attain intuitive attention , those with leisure to do so must exercise to their very utmost the discursive faculties which, while they remain , act as an obstacle . For those whose social function requires them to use those faculties there is probably no other method. For those whose faculties are almost completely paralysed by the fatigue of long daily labour, the possible obstacle is much reduced and the necessary wearing-down minimal . For them, the very work which paralyses, provided it be trans­ formed into poetry, will lead to intuitive attention . 274 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY I n our society, it is educational rather than economic differences that produce the illusion of social inequality. Marx, who is nearly always very powerful when describing evil, rightly denounced as degrading the separation of manual and intellectual labour. He did not know that in all domains, opposites are unified on a plane transcending both. The meeting point of intellectual and manual work is contemplation, which is no work at all . In no society does the person in charge of a machine exercise the same kind of attention as a person working out a problem. If they wish, however, and if they have a method for doing so, each , in exercising the particular kind of attention required of them by society, can allow another kind to appear and develop . This other kind of attention overrides all social obligations and constitutes a direct link with God. If students, young peasants and workers could perceive all the various social functions as equal prerequisites to the emergence in the soul of one uniquely valuable faculty, as they perceive cogs in a perfectly straightforward machine, then equality would become a real thing. It would be the principle of both justice and order. It is only through a clear understanding of the supernatural meaning of each social function that the desirability of reform can be judged and injustice defined. Otherwise injustice will be seen inevitably and erroneously as suffering rooted in the nature of things, or undeserved suffering that results from our own crimes will be attributed to the human condition itself. Certain degrees of subordination and monotony are sufferings inhe­ rent in the very nature of work and inseparable from a corresponding supernatural meaning. Neither is degrading in itself but anything added to them is both degrading and unjust. Anything which prevents poetry from crystallizing around that suffering is criminal . It is not sufficient to rediscover the lost source of the poetry ; working conditions must themselves favour its continued existence. If they are unfavourable, they kill it. Anything which is inextricably linked with either the desire for or the fear of change should be excluded from PREREQUISITE TO DIGNITY OF LABOUR 275 what is essentially a uniform existence and one which should be accepted as such. First, all physical suffering except that which the nature of the work makes unavoid­ able, for it is impossible to suffer without hoping for relief. Hardships can scarcely be more unendurable than in this social condition . Food, lodging, rest and leisure should be such that a normal working day, taken in itself, should be free of physical suffering. Excess, too, is no less undesirable in this kind of life, for the desire for it is itself unlimited and implies a desire for a change of condition . All advertising and propaganda of all kinds, and anything designed to stimulate the desire for excess in both rural and urban workers should be regarded as criminal . There may be individual flights from the working condition either through unsuitability or the possession of different skills but for those who remain , there should be no improvement in individual well-being that is not at the same time seen as linked to the general . There should be no way for a worker to be afraid of getting too little or hope to get more than he needs. Security should be greater than in any other social condition and unaffected by the fluctuations of supply and demand. The arbitrary in human life forces the defenceless soul both to hope and to fear. It should therefore be excluded as far as possible from work as should all unnecessary autho­ rity. A small peasant holding is thus better than a large one. It follows that big is bad where small is possible and that parts are better manufactured in a small workshop than under the orders of a factory foreman. In the book of Job, death is praised since it prevents the slave from hearing his master's voice. Harm is done each time a commanding voice is raised when a practical arrangement could have been made quietly without it. The worst outrage , however, is violation of the workers' attention . This is perhaps an example of a sin against the spirit which is unforgivable if committed deliberately . It destroys that faculty of the soul which is the source of all spiritual action. The inferior kind of attention required by 276 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY taylorized (conveyor-belt) work is incompatible with any other kind of attention since it drains the soul of all save a preoccupation with speed . This kind of work cannot be transformed and must be stopped. All technological prob­ lems should be viewed within the context of what will bring about the best working conditions. This is the most impor­ tant standard to establish ; the whole of society should be first constituted so that work does not demean those who perform it. It is not sufficient that they avoid suffering. Their joy must be desired also, not bought treats but the natural delights that do not cheapen the spirit of poverty. The supernatural poetry which should permeate all their lives could from time to time be concentrated in dazzling celebrations, as necessary in working life as milestones to the walker. Free working holidays like the old tours de France would satisfy the youthful appetite for seeing and learning. All should be done so that nothing essential is missing and the best among them may then possess in their daily lives the completeness artists seek to express in their art. If man's vocation is to achieve pure joy through suffer­ ing, workers are better placed than all others to accomplish it in the truest way. From La Condition Ouvriere , Gallimard, Paris, 1 95 1 , translated by Sian Miles. D E TA CH1V!EN T @ )\ ffliction in itself is not enough for the attainment of J-1.. total detachment. U nconsoled affliction is necessary. There must be no consolation - no apparent consolation . Ineffable consolation then comes down. To forgive debts. To accept the past without asking for future compensation . To stop time at the present instant. This is also the acceptance of death . 'He emptied himself of his divinity. ' To empty ourselves of the world . To take the form of a slave. To reduce ourselves to the point we occupy in space and time - that is to say, to nothing. To strip ourselves of the imaginary royalty of the world. Absolute solitude. Then we possess the truth of the world . Two ways of renouncing material possessions : To give them up with a view to some spiritual advantage. To conceive of them and feel them as conducive to spiritual well-being (for example : hunger, fatigue and humiliation cloud the mind and hinder meditation) and yet to renounce them . Only the second kind of renunciation means nakedness of spirit. Furthermore, material goods would scarcely be 278 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY dangerous if they were seen in isolation and not bound up with spiritual advantage. We must give up everything which is not grace and not even desire grace. The extinction of desire (Buddhism) - or detachment - or amor fati - or desire for the absolute good - these all amount to the same : to empty desire, finality of all content, to desire in the void, to desire without any wishes. To detach our desire from all good things and to wait. Experience proves that this waiting is satisfied. It is then we touch the absolute good . Always, beyond the particular object whatever it may be, we have to fix our will on the void - to will the void. For the good which we can neither picture nor define is a void for us. But this void is fuller than all fullnesses. If we get as far as this we shall come through all right, for God fills the void. It has nothing to do with an intellectual process in the present-day sense . The intelligence has nothing to discover, it has only to clear the ground. It is only good for servile tasks. The good seems to us as a nothingness, since there is no thing that is good. But this nothingness is not unreal. Compared with it, everything in existence is unreal . We must leave on one side the beliefs which fill up voids and sweeten what is bitter. The belief in immortality. The belief in the utility of sin : etiam peccata . The belief in the providential ordering of events - in short the 'consolations' which are ordinarily sought in religion . To love God through and across the destruction of Troy and of Carthage - and with no consolation. Love is not consolation, it is light. The reality of the world is the result of our attachment. It is the reality of the self which we transfer into things. It has DETACHMENT 279 nothing to do with independent reality. That is only perceptible through total detachment . Should only one thread remain , there is still attachment. Affliction which forces us to attach ourselves to the most wretched objects exposes in all its misery the true character of attachment. In this way the necessity for detachment is made more obvious. Attachment is a manufacturer of illusions and whoever wants reaiity ought to be detached. As soon as we know that something is real we can no longer be attached to it. Attachment is no more nor less than an insufficiency in our sense of reality. We are attached to the possession of a thing because we think that if we cease to possess it, it will cease to exist. A great many people do not feel with their whole soul that there is all the difference in the world between the destruction of a town and their own irremediable exile from that town. Human misery would be intolerable if it were not diluted in time. We have to prevent it from being diluted in order that it should be intolerable . 'And when they had had their fill of tears' (Iliad) . - This is another way of making the worst suffering bearable. We must not weep so that we may not be comforted . 1 All suffering which does not detach us is wasted suffering. Nothing is more frightful, a desolate coldness, a warped soul ( Ovid . Slaves in Plautus) . Never to think of a thing or being we love but have not actually before our eyes without reflecting that perhaps this thing has been destroyed , or this person is dead. 1 Yet Jesus Christ sai d : 'Blessed are they that mourn.' But here Simone Wei! is only condemning the tears wrung from us by the loss of temporal goods - tears which man sheds over himself [Gustav Thibon] . 280 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY May our sense of reality not be dissolved by this thought but made more intense. Each time that we say 'Thy will be done' we should have in mind all possible misfortunes added together. Two ways of killing ourselves : suicide or detachment. To kill by our thought everything we love : the only way to die. Only what we love, however ('He who hateth not his father and mother . . . ' but : 'Love your enemies . . . ) . Not to desire that what we love should be immortal. We should neither desire the immortality nor the death of any human being, whoever he may be, with whom we have to do. ' The miser deprives himself of his treasure because of his desire for it. If we can let our whole good rest with something hidden in the ground, why not with God ? But when God has become as full of significance as the treasure is for the miser, we have to tell ourselves insistently that he does not exist. We must experience the fact that we love him, even if he does not exist. It is he who, through the operation of the dark night, withdraws himself in order not to be loved like the treasure is by the miser. Electra weeping for the dead Orestes. If we love God while thinking that he does not exist, he will manifest his existence. From Gravity and Grace , translated by Emma Craufurd, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1 952. Originally published as La Pesanteur et La Grace, Pion, Paris, I 947 . FRI E N DS H I P The essay from which this extract comes was given to the Dominican Father Perrin by Simone Wei! on the day of her final departure from France. In it she describes four differ­ ent kinds of 'implicit love of God' including love ofreligion or religious practices, love of one 's neighbour, love of the beauty of the world and finally friendship. She attached great importance to it and wrote in her Notebooks 'Above all, never allow oneself to dream offn'endship . . . . Fn'end­ ship is not be to sought, dreamed about, longed for but exercised (it is a virtue) . ' For herself, she hardly dared hope for it. In a letter to Joe Bousquet, disabled veteran of the First World War, she explains why: My attitude towards myself . . . is to be explained . . . on the level of biological mechanisms. For twelve years I have suffered from pain around the central point of the nervous system, the meeting­ place of soul and body; this pain persists dun'ng sleep and has never stopped for a second. For a period of ten years it was so great,and was accompanied by such exhaustion, that the effort of attention and intellectual work was usually almost as despairing as that of a condemned man the day before his execution; and often much more so, for my efforts seemed completely sten'le and without even any temporary result. I was sustained by the faith, which I acquired at the age offourteen, that no true effort of 282 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY attention is ever wasted, even though it may never have any visible result, either direct or indirect. Nevertheless, a time came when I thought my soul menaced, through exhaustion and an aggravation of the pain, by such a hideous and total breakdown that I spent several weeks of anguished uncertainty whether death was not my imperative duty - although it seemed to me appalling that my lzfe should end in horror. As I told you, I was only able to calm myself by deciding to live conditionally, for a trial period. A little earlier, when I had already been for years in this physical state, I worked for nearly a year in engineen'ng factories in the Paris region. The combination ofpersonal experience and sympathy for the wretched mass ofpeople around me, in which I formed, even in my own eyes, an undistinguishable item, implanted so deep in my heart the affliction of social degradation that I have felt a slave ever since, in the Roman sense of the word. Dun'ng all this time, the word God had no place at all in my thoughts. It never had, until the day - about three and a half years ago - when I could no longer keep it out. At a moment of intense physical pain, while I was making the effort to love, although believing I had no right to give any name to the love, I felt, while completely unprepared for it (I had never read the mystics), a presence more personal, more certain, and more real than that of a human being; it was inaccessible both to sense and to imagination, and it resembled the love that irradiates the tenderest smile of somebody one loves. Since that moment, the name of God and the name of Christ have been more and more irresistibly mingled with my thoughts. Until then my only faith had been the Stoic amor fati as Marcus Aurelius understood it, and I had always faithfully practised it to love the universe as one 's city, one 's native country, the beloved fatherland of every soul; to cherish it for its beauty, in the total integn'ty of the order and necessity which are its substance, and all the events that occur in it. The result was that the irreducible quantity of hatred and repulsion which goes with suffering and affliction recoiled entirely upon myself. And the quantity is very great, because the suffering in question is located at the very root of my every single thought, without exception. This is so much the case that I absolutely cannot imagine the possibility that any human being couldfeel fn'mdship for me. If I believe in yours it is only because I have confidence in you and FRIENDSHIP 283 you have assured me of it, so that my reason tells me to believe it. But this does not make it seem any the less impossible to my imagination. Because of this propensity of my imagination I am all the more tenderly grateful to those who accomplish this impossibility. Because friendship is an incomparable, immeasurable boon to me, and a source of lzfe - not metaphorically but literally. Since it is not only my body but my soul itself that is poisoned all through by suffen"ng, it is impossible for my thought to dwell there and it is obliged to travel elsewhere. It can only dwell for bn"ef moments in God; it dwells often among things, but it would be against nature for human thought never to dwell in anything human. Thus it is literally true that fn"endship gives to my thought all the life it has, apart from what comes to it from God or from the beauty of the world. So you can see what you have done for me by giving me yours . . . There is however a personal and human love which is pure and which enshrines an intimation and a reflection of divine love. This is friendship, provided we keep strictly to the true meaning of the word. Preference for some human being is necessarily a differ­ ent thing from charity. Charity does not discriminate. If it is found more abundantly in any special quarter, it is be­ cause affliction has chanced to provide an occasion there for the exchange of compassion and gratitude. It is equally available for the whole human race, inasmuch as affliction can come to all , offering them an opportunity for such an exchange . Preference for a human being can be of two kinds. Either we are seeking some particular good in him or we need him. I n a general way all possible attachments come under one of these heads. We are drawn towards a thing, either because there is some good we are seeking from it, or because we cannot do without it. Sometimes the two motives coincide. Often however they do not . Each is distinct and quite independent. We eat distasteful food , if we have nothing else, because we cannot do otherwise. A moderately greedy 284 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY man looks out for delicacies, but he can easily do without them. If we have no air we are suffocated ; we struggle to get it, not because we expect to get some advantage from it but because we need it. We go in search of sea air without being driven by any necessity, because we like it. In time it often comes about automatically that the second motive takes the place of the first. This is one of the great misfortunes of our race. A man smokes opium in order to attain to a special condition, which he thinks superior ; often, as time goes on, the opium reduces him to a miserable condition which he feels to be degrading, but he is no longer able to do without it. Arnolphe bought Agnes from her adopted mother, because it seemed to him it would be an advantage to have a little girl with him, a little girl whom he would gradually make into a good wife. 1 Later on she ceased to cause him anything but a heart-rending and degrading torment. But with the passage of time his attach­ ment to her had become a vital bond which forced this terrible line from his lips : 'Mais je sens la-dedans qu 'il faudra que je creve '2 Harpagon started by considering gold as an advantage. Later it became nothing but the object of a haunting obses­ sion, yet an object of which the loss would cause his death . As Plato says, there is a great difference between the essence of the Necessary and that of the Good. There is no contradiction between seeking our own good in a human being and wishing for his good to be increased. For this very reason, when the motive that draws us towards anybody is simply some advantage for ourselves, the con­ ditions of friendship are not fulfilled. Friendship is a super­ natural harmony, a union of opposites. When a human being is in any degree necessary to us, we cannot desire his good unless we cease to desire our own. Where there is necessity there is constraint and domination . We are in the power of that of which we stand in need, unless we possess it. The central good for every man is the free - 1 Characters in Moliere's L'Ecole des femmes. Harpagon is a character in Moliere's L 'Avare . 2 'But I feel in all this that I shall be torn asunder.' FRIENDSHIP 285 disposal of himself. Either we renounce it, which is a crime of idolatry, since it can be renounced only in favour of God, or we desire that the being we stand in need of should be deprived of it. Any kind of mechanism may join human beings together with bonds of affection which have the iron hardness of necessity. Mother love is often of such a kind ; so at times is paternal love , as in Le Pere Goriot of B alzac ; so is carnal love in its most intense form , as in L'Ecole des femmes and in Phedre ; so also, very frequently, is the love between husband and wife, chiefly as a result of habit. Filial and fraternal love are more rarely of this nature . There are moreover degrees of necessity. Everything is necessary in some degree if its loss really causes a decrease of vital energy . (This word is here used in the strict and precise sense that it might have if the study of vital phenom­ ena were as far advanced as that of falling bodies . ) When the degree of necessity is extreme, deprivation leads to death. This is the case when all the vital energy of one being is bound up with another by some attachment. In the lesser degrees, deprivation leads to a more or less considerable lessening of energy. Thus a total deprivation of food causes death , whereas a partial deprivation only diminishes the life force. Nevertheless the necessary quantity of food is con­ sidered to be that required if a person is not to be weakened. The most frequent cause of necessity in the bonds of affection is a combination of sympathy and habit. As in the case of avarice or drunkenness, that which was at first a search for some desired good is transformed into a need by the mere passage of time . The difference from avarice, drunkenness, and all the vices, however, is that in the bonds of affection the two motives - search for a desired good, and need - can very easily coexist. They can also be separated. When the attachment of one being to another is made up of need and nothing else it is a fearful thing. Few things in this world can reach such a degree of ugliness and horror. There is always something horrible whenever a human being seeks what is good and only finds necessity. 286 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY The stories that tell of a beloved being who suddenly appears with a death's head best symbolize this. The human soul possesses a whole arsenal of lies with which to put up a defence against this ugliness and, in imagination, to manu­ facture sham advantages where there is only necessity. It is for this very reason that ugliness is an evil, because it conduces to lying. Speaking quite generally, we might say that there is affliction whenever necessity, under no matter what form, is imposed so harshly that the hardness exceeds the capacity for lying of the person who receives the impact. That is why the purest souls are the most exposed to affliction. For him who is capable of preventing the automatic reaction of defence, which tends to increase the soul's capacity for lying, affliction is not an evil, although it is always a wound­ ing and in a sense a degradation. When a human being is attached to another by a bond of affection which contains any degree of necessity, it is im­ possible that he should wish autonomy to be preserved both in himself and in the other. It is impossible by virtue of the mechanism of nature. It is, however, made possible by the miraculous intervention of the supernatural . This miracle is friendship. 'Friendship is an equality made of harmony, ' said the Pythagoreans. There is harmony because there is a super­ natural union between two opposites, that is to say, necess­ ity and liberty, the two opposites God combined when he created the world and men . There is equality because each wishes to preserve the faculty of free consent both in him­ self and in the other. When anyone wishes to put himself under a human being or consents to be subordinated to him, there is no trace of friendship . Racine's Pylades is not the friend of Orestes. There is no friendship where there is inequality. A certain reciprocity is essential in friendship . If all good will is entirely lacking on one of the two sides, the other should suppress his own affection, out of respect for the free consent which he should not desire to force. If on one FRIENDSHIP 287 of the two sides there is not any respect for the autonomy of the other, this other must cut the bond uniting them out of respect for himself. In the same way, he who consents to be enslaved cannot gain friendship. But the necessity contained in the bond of affection can exist on one side only, and in this case there is only friendship on one side, if we keep to the strict and exact meaning of the word . A friendship is tarnished as soon as necessity triumphs, if only for a moment, over the desire to preserve the faculty of free consent on both sides. I n all human things, necessity is the principle of impurity. All friendship is impure if even a trace of the wish to please or the contrary desire to dominate is found in it. In a perfect friendship these two desires are completely absent. The two friends have fully consented to be two and not one, they respect the distance which the fact of being two distinct creatures places between them. Man has the right to desire direct union with God alone. Friendship is a miracle by which a person consents to view from a certain distance , and without coming any nearer, the very being who is necessary to him as food. It requires the strength of soul that Eve did not have ; and yet she had no need of the fruit. If she had been hungry at the moment when she looked at the fruit, and if in spite of that she had remained looking at it indefinitely without taking one step toward it, she would have performed a miracle analogous to that of perfect friendship. Through this supernatural miracle of respect for human autonomy, friendship is very like the pure forms of com­ passion and gratitude called forth by affliction . In both cases the contraries which are the terms of the harmony are necessity and liberty, or in other words subordination and equality. These two pairs of opposites are equivalent. From the fact that the desire to please and the desire to command are not found in pure friendship, it has in it, at the same time as affection, something not unlike a complete indifference. Although it is a bond between two people it is in a sense impersonal. It leaves impartiality intact. It in no way prevents us from imitating the perfection of our Father 288 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY in heaven who freely distributes sunlight and rain in every place. On the contrary, friendship and this distribution are the mutual conditions one of the other, in most cases at any rate. For, as practically every human being is joined to others by bonds of affection that have in them some degree of necessity, he cannot go toward perfection except by transforming this affection into friendship. Friendship has something universal about it. It consists of loving a human being as we should like to be able to love each soul in particular of all those who go to make up the human race. As a geometrician looks at a particular figure in order to deduce the universal properties of the triangle, so he who knows how to love directs upon a particular human being a universal love . The consent to preserve an autonomy within ourselves and in others is essentially of a universal order. As soon as we wish for this autonomy to be respected in more than just one single being we desire it for everyone, for we cease to arrange the order of the world in a circle whose centre is here below. We transport the centre of the circle beyond the heavens. Friendship does not have this power if the two beings who love each other, through an unlawful use of affection, think they form only one. But then there is not friendship in the true sense of the word. That is what might be called an adulterous union, even though it comes about between husband and wife . There is not friendship where distance is not kept and respected. The simple fact of having pleasure in thinking in the same way as the beloved being, or in any case the fact of desiring such an agreement of opinion, attacks the purity of the friendship at the same time as its intellectual integrity. It is very frequent. But at the same time pure friendship is rare . When the bonds of affection and necessity between human beings are not supernaturally transformed into friendship, not only is the affection of an impure and low order, but it is also combined with hatred and repulsion . That is shown very well in L'Ecole des Femmes and in FRIENDSHIP 289 Phedre . The mechanism is the same in affections other than carnal love . It is easy to understand this. We hate what we are dependent upon . We become disgusted with what de­ pends on us. Sometimes affection does not only become mixed with hatred and revulsion ; it is entirely changed into it . The transformation may sometimes even be almost im­ mediate, so that hardly any affection has had time to show ; this is the case when necessity is laid bare almost at once. When the necessity which brings people together has no­ thing to do with the emotions, when it is simply due to circumstances, hostility often makes its appearance from the start. When Christ said to his disciples : 'Love one another, ' it was not attachment he was laying down as their rule. As it was a fact that there were bonds between them due to the thoughts, the life, and the habits they shared, he com­ manded them to transform these bonds into friendship, so that they should not be allowed to turn into impure attach­ ment or hatred . Since, shortly before his death , Christ gave this as a new commandment to be added to the two great commandments of the love of our neighbour and the love of God, we can think that pure friendship, like the love of our neighbour, has in it something of a sacrament. Christ perhaps wished to suggest this with reference to Christian friendship when he said : 'Where there are two or three gathered together in my name there am I in the midst of them . ' Pure friendship is an image of the original and perfect friendship that be­ longs to the Trinity and is the very essence of God . It is impossible for two human beings to be one while scrupu­ lously respecting the distance that separates them , unless God is present in each of them . The point at which parallels meet is infinity. From ' Forms of the I mplicit Love of God ' , in Waiting on God, translated by Emma Craufurd, Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1 95 1 . Originally pub­ lished as L'Attente de Dieu , La Colombe, Paris, 1 950. L O VE ove is a sign of our wretchedness. God can only love L himself. We can only love something else. God's love for us is not the reason for which we should love him. God's love for us is the reason for us to love ourselves. How could we love ourselves without this motive ? I t is impossible for man to love himself except in this roundabout way. If my eyes are blindfolded and if my hands are chained to a stick, this stick separates me from things but I can explore them by means of it . It is only the stick which I feel, it is only the wall which I perceive. It is the same with creatures and the faculty of love. Supernatural love touches only creatures and goes only to God. It is only creatures which it loves (what else have we to love ? ) , but it loves them as intermediaries. For this reason it loves all creatures equally, itself included. To love a stranger as oneself implies the reverse : to love oneself as a stranger. Love of God is pure when joy and suffering inspire an equal degree of gratitude. LOVE 291 Love on the part of someone who is happy is the wish to share the suffering of the beloved who is unhappy . Love on the part of someone who is unhappy is to be filled with joy by the mere knowledge that his beloved is happy without sharing in this happiness or even wishing to do so . I n Plato's eyes, carnal love is a degraded image of true love. Chaste human love (conjugal fidelity) is a less degraded image of it . Only in the stupidity of the present day could the idea of sublimation arise. The Love of Phaedrns . He neither exercises force nor submits to it. That constitutes the only purity. Contact with the sword causes the same defilement whether it be through the handle or the point. For him who loves, its metallic coldness will not destroy love, but will give the impression of being abandoned by God. Supernatural love has no contact with force, but at the same time it does not protect the soul against the coldness of force, the coldness of steel . Only an earthly attachment, if it has in it enough energy, can afford protection from the coldness of steel. Armour, like the sword, is made of metal . Murder freezes the soul of the man who loves only with a pure love, whether he be the author or the victim, so likewise does everything which, without going so far as actual death, constitutes violence. If we want to have a love which will protect the soul from wounds, we must love something other than God. Love tends to go ever further and further, but there is a limit. When the limit is passed love turns to hate. To avoid this change love has to become different . Among human beings, only the existence of those we love is fully recognized. Belief in the existence of other human beings as such is love . 292 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY The mind is not forced to believe in the existence of anything (subjectivism, absolute idealism, solipsism, scepticism : cf. the Upanishads, the Taoists and Plato, who, all of them, adopt this philosophical attitude by way of purification) . That is why the only organ of contact with existence is acceptance, love . That is why beauty and reality are identical. That is why joy and the sense of reality are identical . This need to be the creator of what we love is a need to imitate God. But the divinity towards which it tends is false, unless we have recourse to the model seen from the other, the heavenly side . . . . Pure love of creatures is not love in God, but love which has passed through God as through fire. Love which detaches itself completely from creatures to ascend to God and comes down again associated with the creative love of God . Thus the two opposites which rend human love are united : to love the beloved being just as he is, and to want to recreate him. Imaginary love of creatures. We are attached by a cord to all the objects of attachment, and a cord can always be cut. We are also attached by a cord to the imaginary God, the God for whom love is also an attachment. But to the real God we are not attached and that is why there is no cord which can be cut. He enters into us. He alone can enter into us. All other things remain outside and our knowledge of them is confined to the tensions of varying degree and direction which affect the cord when there is a change of position on their part or on ours. Love needs reality. What is more terrible than the discovery that through a bodily appearance we have been loving an imaginary being. It is much more terrible than death, for death does not prevent the beloved from having lived. That is the punishment for having fed love on imagination. LOVE 293 It is an act of cowardice to seek from (or to wish to give) the people we love any other consolation than that which works of art give us. These help us through the mere fact that they exist . To love and to be loved only serves mutually to render this existence more concrete, more constantly present to the mind . But it should be present as the source of our thoughts, not as their object . If there are grounds for wishing to be understood, it is not for ourselves but for the other, in order that we may exist for him . Everything which is vile or second-rate in us revolts against purity and needs, in order to save its own life, to soil this purity. To soil is to modify, it is to touch . The beautiful is that which we cannot wish to change. To assume power over is to soil. To possess is to soil. To love purely is to consent to distance, it is to adore the distance between ourselves and that which we love . The imagination is always united with a desire, that is to say a value. Only desire without an object is empty of imagination. There is the real presence of God in everything which imagination does not veil . The beautiful takes our desire captive and empties it of its object, giving it an object which is present and thus forbidding it to fly off towards the future. Such is the price of chaste love. Every desire for enjoyment belongs to the future and the world of illusion, whereas if we desire only that a being should exist, he exists : what more is there to desire ? The beloved being is then naked and real, not veiled by an imaginary future. The miser never looks at his treasure without imagining it n times larger. It is necessary to be dead in order to see things in their nakedness. Thus in love there is chastity or the lack of chastity according to whether the desire is or is not directed towards the future. In this sense, and on condition that it is not turned 294 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY towards a pseudo-immortality conceived on the model of the future, the love we devote to the dead is perfectly pure. For it is the desire for a life which is finished, which can no longer give anything new. We desire that the dead man should have existed, and he has existed. Wherever the spirit ceases to be a principle it also ceases to be an end . Hence the close connection between collective 'thought' under all its forms and the loss of the sense of and respect for souls. The soul is the human being considered as having a value in itself. To love the soul of a woman is not to think of her as serving one's own pleasure, etc. Love no longer knows how to contemplate, it wants to possess (disappearance of Platonic love) . 1 It is a fault to wish to be understood before we have made ourselves clear to ourselves. It is to seek pleasures in friendship and pleasures which are not deserved . It is something which corrupts even more than love. You would sell your soul for friendship. Learn to thrust friendship aside, or rather the dream of friendship . To desire friendship is a great fault. Friendship should be a gratuitous joy like those afforded by art or life. We must refuse it so that we may be worthy to receive it ; it is of the order of grace ('Depart from me, 0 Lord . . . . ) . It is one of those things which are added unto us. Every dream of friendship deserves to be shattered . It is not by chance that you have never been loved . . . . To wish to escape from solitude is cowardice. Friendship is not to be sought, not to be dreamed, not to be desired ; it is to be exercised (it is a virtue) . We must have done with all this impure and turbid border of sentiment. Schluss ! Or rather (for we must not prune too severely within ourselves) , everything in friendship which does not pass ' 1 Here 'Platonic' love has nothing to do with what today goes by the same name. It does not proceed from the imagination but from the soul. I t is purely spiritual contemplation [Gustav Thibon] . LOVE 295 into real exchanges should pass into considered thoughts. It serves no useful purpose to do without the inspiring virtue of friendship . What should be severely forbidden is to dream of its sentimental joys. That is corruption. Moreover it is as stupid as to dream about music or painting. Friendship cannot be separated from reality any more than the beautiful . It is a miracle, like the beautiful. And the miracle consists simply in the fact that it exists . At the age of twenty-five, it is high time to have done with adolescence once and for all . . . . Do not allow yourself to be imprisoned by any affection . Keep your solitude. The day, if it ever comes, when you are given true affection there will be no opposition between interior solitude and friendship, quite the reverse. It is even by this infallible sign that you will recognize it . Other affections have to be severely disciplined . The same words (e.g. a man says to his wife : ' I love you') can be commonplace or extraordinary according to the manner in which they are spoken. And this manner depends on the depth of the region in a man's being from which they proceed without the will being able to do anything. And by a marvellous agreement they reach the same region in him who hears them . Thus the hearer can discern, if he has any power of discernment, what is the value of the words. Benefaction is permissible precisely because it constitutes a humiliation still greater than pain, a still more intimate and undeniable proof of dependence. And gratitude is prescribed for the same reason, since therein lies the use to be made of the received benefit. The dependence, however, must be on fate and not on any particular human being. That is why the benefaCi'or is under an obligation to keep himself entirely out of the benefaction. Moreover the gratitude must not in any degree constitute an attachment, for that is the gratitude proper to dogs. 296 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY Gratitude is first of all the business of him who helps, if the help is pure. It is only by virtue of reciprocity that it is due from him who is helped . I n order to feel true gratitude (the case of friendship being set aside) , I have to think that it is not out of pity, sympathy or caprice that I am being treated well, it is not as a favour or privilege, nor as a natural result of temperament, but from a desire to do what justice demands. Accordingly he who treats me thus wishes that all who are in my situation may be treated in the same way by all who are in his own . From Gravity and Grace , translated by Emma Craufurd, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1952. Originally published as La Pesanteur et Ia Grace , Pion, Paris, 1 947. CHANCE he beings I love are creatures. They were born by T chance. My meeting with them was also by chance . They will die. What they think, do and say is limited and is a mixture of good and evil . I have t o know this with all m y soul and not love them the less. I have to imitate God who infinitely loves finite things in that they are finite things. We want everything which has a value to be eternal . Now everything which has a value is the product of a meeting, lasts throughout this meeting and ceases when those things which met are separated . That is the central idea of Buddhism (the thought of Heraclitus) . It leads straight to God. Meditation on chance which led to the meeting of my father and mother is even more salutary than meditation on death . Is there a single thing in me of which the origin is not to be found in that meeting? Only God . And yet again, my thought of God had its origin in that meeting. Stars and blossoming fruit-trees : utter permanence and extreme fragility give an equal sense of eternity. 298 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY The theories about progress and the 'genius which always pierces through', arise from the fact that it is intolerable to suppose that what is most precious in the world should be given over to chance . It is because it is intolerable that it ought to be contemplated . Creation is this very thing. The only good which is not subject to chance is that which is outside the world. The vulnerability of precious things is beautiful because vulnerability is a mark of existence. The destruction of Troy. The fall of the petals from fruit trees in blossom. To know that what is most precious is not rooted in existence - that is beautiful. Why? It projects the soul beyond time. The woman who wishes for a child white as snow and red as blood gets it, but she dies and the child is given over to a stepmother. From Gravity and Grace, translated by Emma Craufurd, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1952. Originally published as La Pesanteur et Ia Grace, Pion, Paris, 1 947. B I B LIOGRAPHY Works by Simone Weil L 'A ttente de Dieu ( 1 950) Paris: Gallimard. Cahiers I ( 1 9 5 1 ) Paris: Pion. Cahiers II ( 1 953) Paris: Pion. Cahiers III ( 1 9 5 6) Paris: Pion. La Condition ouvriere ( 1 9 5 1 ) Paris: Gallimard. La Connaissance surnaturelle ( 1 950) Paris: Gallimard. Ecrit s de Londres et dernieres lettres (1 957) Paris: Gallimard. Ecrit s historiques et politiques ( 1 960) Paris: Gallimard. L 'Enracinement : Prelude tl une declaration des devoirs envers l 'etre humain ( 1 949) Paris : Gallimard. Intuitions prechretiennes ( 1 9 5 1 ) Paris: La Colombe. Leron s de philo sophie ( 1 959) Paris: Pion. Lettre a w1 religieux ( 1 9 5 1 ) Paris: Gallimard. Oppresssion et liberte ( 1 95 5 ) Paris: Gallimard. Pensees san ordre concemant !'amour de Dieu ( 1 962) Paris: Gallimard. La Pesanteur et Ia grace ( 1 947) Paris: Pion. Poemes ( 1 968) Paris: Gallimard. La Source grecque ( 1 953) Paris: Gallimard. Sur Ia science ( 1 965) Paris: Gallimard. Venise sauvee ( 1 95 5 ) Paris: Gallimard. 300 SIMONE WElL- AN ANTHOLOGY Translations of Simone Weil into English Gravity and Grace (2002) trans. Emma Craufurd, London: Routledge. Intimations of Christianity among the A ncient Greeks ( 1 998) ed. Elizabeth Chase Geissbuhler, London: Routledge. Lectures on Philosophy ( 1 978) trans. H. Price, Ca:nbridge: C. U . P . Letter to a Priest (2002) London: Routledge. The Need for Roots (200 1 ) trans. A. F. Wills with a foreword by T. S . Eliot, London: Routledge. The Notebooks of Simone Weil (2004) trans. Arthur Wills, London: Routledge. On Science, necessity and the love of God ( 1 968) Oxford: O.U . P . Oppression and Liberty (200 1 ) trans. Arthur Wills and John Petrie, London: Routledge. Selected Essays 1 934-43 ( 1 962) trans. Richard Rees, Oxford: 0. U . P . Seventy Letters ( 1 965) trans. Richard Rees, Oxford: 0 . U . P . Waiting on God ( 1 95 1 ) trans. Emma Craufurd, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. Waiting for God ( 1 973) introd. Leslie Fiedler, U S A: Harper Perennial . Suggestions for Further Reading Anderson, Pamela ( 1 998) A Feminist Philosophy of Religion, Oxford: Blackwell. Bell, Richard H. (ed.) ( 1 993) Simone Weil 's Philosophy of Culture, Cambridge: C . U .P. Cabaud, Jacques ( 1 964) Simone Weil: A Fellowship in Love, London: Harvill Press. Dargan, Joan ( 1 999) Simone Weil: Thinking Poetically, Albany, N.Y . : S U N Y Press. Gray, Francine du Plessix (200 1 ) Simone Weil, London, Weidenfeld and Nicolson. Griffin, Gabriele ( 1 993) The Influence of the Writings of Simone Weil on the Fiction of Iris Murdoch, San Francisco: Mellen Research Univer­ sity Press. Heaney, Seamus ( 1 995) The Redress of Poetry, London: Faber and Faber. Irigaray, Luce ( 1 985) Speculum of the Other Woman, trans. Gillian C. Gill, Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press. - ( 1 993) Sexes and Genealogies, trans. Gillian C. Gill, New York: Columbia University Press. Jantzen, Grace ( 1 998) Becoming Divine, Manchester: Manchester Uni­ versity Press. Little, 1. P . ( 1 988) Simone Weil: York: Berg. Waiting on Truth, Oxford and New - (2003) Simone Weil on Colonialism, Rowman and Littlefield. BIBLIOGRAPH Y McLellan, David 301 ( 1 99 1 ) Simone Wei!: Utopian Pessimist, London: Macmillan. Martin, Agnes ( 1 99 1 ) Kunstmuseum Willlerthur, Ostfildern: Cantz Verlag. Murdoch, I ris ( 1 992) Metaphysics as a Guide to Morals, London: Chatto and Windus. - ( 1 997) Existentialists and Mystics, London: Chatto and Windus. Nye, Andrea ( 1 994) Philosophia, London and New York: Routledge. Petrement, Simone ( 1 988) Simone Wei!: A Life, trans. R. Rosenthal, New York: Schocken Books. Rees, Rhush (2000) Discussions of Simone Wei!, New York: S U N Y . Ruddick, Sara ( 1 990) Maternal Thinking: towards a politics of peace, London: The Women's Press. Springstead, Eric 0. ( 1 998) Simone Wei!, Maryknoll, N . Y . : Orbis Books. Winch, Peter ( 1 989) Simone Wei!: The Just Balance, Cambridge: C . U .P. I ND EX @ adaptation, 1 5 0 Aeschylus, 87 , 92, 195 , 2 1 1 affection, and friendship, 285-9, 295 affliction, 85-7 , 88, 90-2 , 95, 2 1 8 , 260-1 , 277, 279, 282, 283 , 286 ; and beauty, 92; and destruction of the ' 1 ' , 99-100, 1 02-3 ; and the good, 86--7 ; horror of, 9 1 ; inarticulate, 85 ; and suffering, 90, 9 1 ; and survival, l OG-1 ; and truth, 87 , 88, 92 Alain (Emile Chartier), 7, 9-10 Alsthom electrical factory, Simone Weil's job in, 1 9-22, 24, 264 anarchists, 3 1 , 261 anti-fascism and anti-communism, 246, 256 appeasement, 258 Aristotle, 86, 87, 1 3 8, 1 63 arms, armaments, 1 5 1 , 1 56 Arnaud, Pierre, 1 1 art, 74, 7 5 , 77, 79, 1 4 1 , 1 78 ; intuitive attention as source of, 273 ; the sacred in, 75 Ashford, Kent, Simone Wei! in sanatorium in, 48 , 50 Assisi, 34, 35 Association pour !'etude de Ia pensee de Simone Wei!, 3 associations, 1 3 2-4; promoting ideas, 1 30 , 1 32-3 ; promoting interests, 1 30, 1 3 3 atheism, 1 4 3 , 221 attachment, 279, 295 ; and affliction, 1 00-1 , 279 ; and friendshi p , 283-4, 285 , 286, 289 ; and love, 292 attention, notion of, 7-8 , 8 3 , 8 5 , 9 1 -2, 22-4, 259, 273-4, 282 ; impersonal stage of, 76, 79 ; intuitive, 273 ; plenitude of, 270 ; violation of the workers, 275--6 , and will , 23 1 -7 automatic development, 1 67-8 automatic series, 1 7 , 1 8 Auxerre, 1 7 ; Simone Weil's teaching post in, 1 5 - 1 6 balance (counter-balance) , 54-5 , 56, 1 1 4, 1 1 9 , 1 2 1 , 262; and power, 1 58 , 1 5 9--60 Balzac, Honore de, 1 5 9 ; La Comedie Humaine, 1 6 1 ; Pere Gon"ot, 285 baptism, 39, 4 1 Bass-Indre Forges, Simone Weil's job in, 23-4, 264 304 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY beauty, 29-30, 92-3 , 95, 98, 234, 268, 28 1 , 293 ; and affliction, 92; impersonality of, 75 , 77 ; and order, 1 3 , 1 1 4 Beauvoir, Simone de, 9 belief, 5, 54, 23 1 , 278 benefaction, 295 Bernanos, Georges, 8 1 Bernard, M . , factory manager, 29, 30 Bhagavad Gita , 38 bitterness, 208, 2 1 1 , 1 84 B lake, William, 74-5 &n boredom : associated with money, 1 3 1-2; and risk, 1 34-5 , 229 Bourges, Simone Weil teaches philosophy in, 29 bourgeoisie , 1 32, 252, 267 Bousquet, Joe, 64-5 , 28 1-3 Buddhism, 297 Cabaud, Jacques, 36; L'Expen"ence Wcue de Simone Wei/, 3 Cahiers du Sud, 38, 1 82 Camus, Albert, 2, 57, 1 05 Cancouet, Lucien, 9 capitalism, 1 49 , 1 50, 1 5 3 , 1 57 , 1 60, 1 69, 243, 252-3 , 255 ; and antagonisms between nations, 243-4 ; economic relations, 25 1-3 capitalist accumulation, 160 carnal love, 285, 288, 291 Catharism, 36, 1 82 Cervantes, Miguel de, 2 1 4 C . G .T . U . , 9, 1 6 chance, 297� Chanson de Roland, 2 1 1 chansons de geste, 1 6 1 , 2 1 1 charity, 8 3 , 283 Chartier, Emile see Alain Cheval de Troie , 264 Christianity, 4-5 , 28-9, 34-5 , 40-1 , 2 1 3- 1 4 ; and the dignity of labour, 268-74; and eternal obligation, 1 09 ; the Gospels, 2 1 2 , 2 1 3 , 2 1 4, 270 ; martyrs, 2 1 4 ; and notion of rights, 83 Church, Catholic : ersatz good in, 142; intermediaries of the, 269 ; Simone Weil's position vis-a-vis, 3-5 , 39, 4 1-2, 45, 49-50, 5 1 , 264 civil war, 72, 245 , 254; Spanish, 3 1 , 238 , 247� class struggle , 248-50, 253-4 collective property, 1 3 6-7 collectivity, 58, 8 1 , 1 48 , 1 75-6, 223 ; continuity of, 1 1 1 ; and freedom of expression, 1 28-9 ; and idolatry, 76, 1 4 1 ; and obligations, 58, 1 07 , 1 08 , 1 1 01 2 ; and oppression, 1 72-3 ; and revolution, 266 ; souls devoured by, 1 1 1 , 1 1 2 ; subordination of the person to the, 63-4, 75-9 , 97 Comiso, 63 command, the functions of, 249 communism, 1 45 , 242 ; French, 1 1 , 16, 1 3 1 ; German, 1 5 ; Russian, 1 5 , 16, 245, 268 ; v. fascism, 245-6, 254 compassion, 283 , 287 compensation(s) , 266 ; and void, 2 1 6-20 'Concerning Perception, or The Adventure of Proteus' (Libres Propos ) , 1 0 La Condition Ouvriere , 264-76 conditions of existence, 1 5 0 , 1 5 1 , 156 conflicts : and the power of words, 241-5 8 ; with no definable objectives, 239-4 1 , 254 conscience, human, 1 09, 1 43 contradiction, 5 1 , 257, 259-63 Corneille, Pierre, 87 Crashaw, Richard, 35 cries of personal protest, 72-3 , 74, 84 ; 'why am I being hurt ? ', 72, 93, 94 crime(s) : non-punishable, 1 3 8 ; and punishment, 94-5, 1 22-4 cruelty, 70, 1 1 0 d'Annunzio, Gabriele, 3 2 Dante, Alighieri, 1 5 9 Darwin, Charles, 1 5 0 , 1 5 1 death, 5 1 , 1 84, 1 86, 1 98 , 20 1 , 202-4, 285 ; acceptance of, 1 0 1 , 277 ; horror of, 9 1 INDEX decreation o f the personality, 5 1-2, 56 defensive guerrilla warfare, 34 degradation, social, 2, 2 1 8- 1 9 , 274, 282 democracy, 1 5 , 8 1 , 86, 97, 242 ; and dictatorship, 246--7 , 254 ; and political parties, 74, 1 29-30 D escartes, Rene, 1 72 desire : beauty as object of, 268 ; and effort, 265 , 267 ; extinction of (detachment) , 278, 280 ; and imagination, 293 destiny, 1 93-4, 199, 208 ; eternal, 1 08-9, 1 1 1 ; and the soul, 2 1 214 detachment, 8 , 5 3 , 1 0 1 , 1 4 3 , 259, 262, 263n, 277-80, 292 dictatorship, and democracy, 246--7 , 254 Diderot, Denis, 8 1 division of labour, and oppression, 1 49 , 1 54, 1 5 6--7 , 1 67 , 1 76 Donne, John, 35 'Draft for a Statement of Human Obligations', 221-30 Durutti, Catalan anarchist, 3 1 Ecole Normale Superieure, 7 , 9 , 1 0 economic relations, 244, 250, 268 ; capitalist, 25 1-3 effort, human, 232-3 , 265--6, 267 Eliot, T . S . , 6 , 1 06 Encyclopedistes, 8 1 Engels, Friedrich, 1 49 enlightened despotism, 1 66 L 'Enracinement see The Need for Roots Entre Nous (factory magazine ) , 30 equality, 82, 1 60 , 274; and differentiation, 1 1 9-20 ; of friendship, 286--7 ; the need for, 1 1 8-2 1 ; of opportunity, 1 1 8-19 equilibrium, 56, 97 , 1 1 9-20, 1 78 , 2 1 7 , 2 1 8 , 257 ; see also balance eternal beatitude, 26 1 evil, 54, 76, 79 , 85 , 93, 1 42, 1 43 , 1 44-5 , 2 1 6 , 2 3 3 , 23 8 , 265 ; of capitalism, 25 1 -2 ; and contradiction, 26 1 , 263 ; delivery from , 93-4 ; infliction 305 of, 72-3 , 74, 94; and redemptive suffering, 1 0 0 ; substitution of means for ends, 1 6 1 ; and supernatural good, 86 exchange, social, 53-4, 56, 8 1 , 1 49, 1 56--7 , 1 66, 1 67 , 25 1 existence, 29 1 , 292; conditions of, 1 50, 1 5 1 -5 , 1 56 ; as an end in itself, 265--6, 268 existential engagement, 1 05 factory journals, Simon Weil's, 1 9 , 22-3 , 264 faith : profession of, 22 1 -7 ; and studies, 234-5 Falguiere, rue, working-men's school in, 9, 1 0 fascism , 1 32, 242 ; and communism, 245--6, 254 fear, 1 34 , 1 92-3 , 229 ; as a deterrent, 95 Florence, Simone Weil's visit to, 3 1-4 folklore, Simone Weil's love of, 35 force, 60, 63 , 1 1 4, 1 55 ; defined, 183 ; portrayed in the Iliad, 62-3 , 1 82-2 1 5 ; that turns a human being into a thing, 63, 183-90, 204-5 forgiveness, 2 1 6 , 2 1 7 , 220 'Forms of the Implicit Love of God', 28 1 -9 France, Anatole, 244 Free French, 36, 45 , 69, 70 ; Declaration of rights and obligations, 221 freedom of association, 1 24, 1 3 4 ; see also associations freedom of choice, 1 5 5 freedom o f opinion/expression, 73-4, 1 24-34 French Revolution ( 1 789) , 1 0 7 , 1 20, 1 29, 1 48-9, 1 7 1 friendship, 28 1-9, 294-5 ; i n war, 207-8 galvanic response, 1 8 6 Gaulle, General Charles de, 46, 56--7 , 221 genius, 87-8, 232 Germany, 30, 23 8 , 243 , 247 ; 306 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY fascists and communists in , 245--6, 254 ; invasion of France ( 1 940) , 3 7 ; refugees from, 1 6 ; Simone Weil's visit to ( 1 932), 1 4- 1 5 Gide, Andre, 4, 7 7 , 1 26-7 ; Les ' Caves du Vatican , 1 26, 1 27n ; Les Nourritures Terrestres , 1 26 Giotto, 32, 1 03 gnosticism, 38 God, 3 5 , 52, 53, 64, 213, 214, 220, 22 1 , 234, 236, 260, 26 1 , 263n, 268, 269, 27 1 , 273 , 274, 278 , 280, 282, 283 , 285, 286, 287, 289 ; absence of, 5 1 , 5 3 , 54, 100; Christ's image of, 97-8 ; delivery from evil by, 93-4 ; and the Great Beast, 1 4 1 , 1 44 , 145 ; and love, 290, 292, 293, 297 ; and redemptive suffering, 100 golden mean, 1 1 5 the good, goodness, 79, 85, 97, 2 1 9 , 224 ; absolute, 54, 1 42, 222-3 , 238, 278 ; and attention, 233, 234; and contradiction, 259, 263 ; defined by the union of opposites, 26 1 ; and evil, 86, 1 42, 238 , 260, 263 ; and existence, 265 ; expectation of, 5 3 , 7 1 -2 ; and friendship, 283, 284, 285 ; good-evil correlation , 260 ; and punishment, 94-5 ; pure, 86, 87 , 95, 96, 263 ; supernatural, 85--6 Gospels, 92, 193 , 2 1 2 , 2 1 3 , 2 1 4, 270 grace, 9 1 , 94, 1 00, 145, 2 1 4, 232, 233 , 260, 26 1 , 278 gratitude, 283 , 287, 295--6 gratuitous act, 75 Gravity and Grace, 3 , 6 ; 'Attention and Will', 23 1-7 ; 'Chance', 297-8 ; 'Contradiction', 259--63 ; ' Detachment', 277-80 ; 'The Great Beast', 1 4 1--6 ; 'Love', 290--6 ; 'The Mysticism of Work', 1 78-8 1 ; 'Void and Compensation', 2 1 6-20 'The Great Beast', 58, 1 4 1 --6 Greeks, Greek, 3 5 , 6 1 , 8 2 , 1 38 , 1 78 , 240-- 1 ; 'The Iliad o r the Poem of Force', 3 5 , 62-3 , 1 822 1 5 ; and notion of rights, 82-3 ; Simone Wei) teaches Greek to Gustav Thibon, 40-- 1 ; and her notes on philosophers, 46 Greenham women, 63 Gringoire , 1 39 &n 'The Growing of Roots', 1 05--6 Guerithault, Anne Reynaud, 6 Guindy, customs inspector, 1 47 harm, infliction of, 93-5 headaches, Simone Weil's, 1 0 , 1 6 , 20, 22, 4 9 , 2 1 7 , 238 H ebrews, 2 1 3- 1 4 Hegel , Friedrich, 1 8 Hell, nature o f , 1 00 ; quasi-hell o n earth , 1 0 1 Herbert, George, 'Love', 3 5 , 40, 67 heredity, 1 50 Herodotus, 195 hierarchism, 1 2 1 Hitler, Adolf, 1 5 , 3 8 , 5 9 , 8 1-2, 1 82 holidays, free working, 276 Homer, 87, 1 76, 24 1 , 248 ; The Iliad, 3 5 , 62-3 , 87, 1 6 1 , 1 6 3 , 1 82-2 1 5 , 279 ; The Odyssey , 21 1 honour, the need for, 1 2 1-2 hospitality, 206 Hugo, Victor, 77, 87 human environment, highest thought incarnated in, 36-7 human nature, 1 5 1 , 224, 24 1 , 268 human personality, 63-4, 69-98 ; decrcation of the, 5 1-2, 5 6 ; full expression of, 84 humiliation, 90-- 1 , 1 9 1-2 humility, 52-3 , 87, 1 03 idolatry, 76, 1 4 1 , 284 'The Iliad or the Poem of Force', 35, 62-3 , 1 82-2 1 5 imagination, 5 1 , 56, 220; and desire, 293 ; and limit, 56; and love, 292 imaginary advantages, 2 1 9 INDEX the impersonal, 5 1-2, 53, 54, 57, 74-9, 87, 98 industrial firms, struggle within, 253-4 industry, big, 1 7 , 1 67-8 inequality, 1 1 9, 120, 1 5 7 , 1 58, 223, 25 1 , 274, 286 initiative, 1 5 5 ; the need to show, 1 1 7- 1 8 injustice, 7 2 , 8 3 , 1 0 I , 266, 274 inspiration of a people, 58-9 intelligence, 52-3 , 7 3 , 235 ; and freedom of expression, 1 24-5 , 1 28-9 ; and language, 88-90, 242; and wisdom, 89 interests : associations promoting, 1 3 0, 1 3 3 ; private, 1 6 1 ; two senses of the word , 1 3 3 Intimations of Christianity , 3 intuitive attention, 267 Israel, 1 4 3 , 1 44 Italy, 238 ; Simone Weil's travels in ( 1 937 ) , 3 1-4, 238 'Je est un autre ', 64 Jesus Christ, 34, 4 1 , 5 5 , 83 , 95, 97-8, 1 09, 1 42, 1 44, 2 1 2 , 214, 236, 263, 270-1 , 279n , 282, 289 Jews, French, 37 Joan of Arc, 1 22 justice, 60-1 , 63 , 72, 82, 83 , 92, 93, 94, 97, 98, 1 32, 1 5 7 , 208, 2 1 1 , 274; repressive, 95 Kharma, 1 95 labour, 8--9 ; co-ordination of, 17 5 , 1 7 6 ; dignity o f , 24, 26-7 , 264-76 ; manual and intellectual, 274; oppression and division of, 1 5 , 1 49 , 1 54, 1 5 6-7, 1 67 , 1 7 6 ; physical, 6 1 , 79-80, 1 06 ; and responsibility, 1 1 7 ; taylorized (conveyor-belt) , 264, 278 ; unskilled, 20, 26-7 ; the value of, 79-80 ; see also workers Lamarck, Jean-Baptiste, 1 50, 1 5 1 language, 88-90 ; and opinions, 88, 89 ; the power of words, 96-7 , 238-5 8 ; relations expressed by, 88-9, 90 ; use and misuse of, 55-6 307 Lectures on Philosophy , 3 , 6 Lenin, V . I . , 20 Le Puy, 1 7 ; Simone Weil teaches philosophy in, 1 1- 1 2 , 1 3 - 1 4 , 1 5 letters o f Simone Weil : to Albertine Thevenon, 1 9-22 ; to Andre, her brother, 48 , 1 8 3 ; to Boris, 23-4 ; to Father Perrin, 4 1-3 ; to Gustav Thibon, 43 ; to Jean Pasternak, 3 1 -4; to Joe Bousquet, 64-5, 28 1 -3 ; to Maurice Schumann, 43-5 ; to her parents, 1-2, 46-8 , 69-70 ; to Simone Petrement, 6 1 liberty, 1 1 7 ; defined, 1 8- 1 9 , 1 1 5 ; the need for, 1 1 5-1 6 Libres Propos (journal ) , 1 0 limit, notion of, 56, 238, 242, 243 literature : and freedom of expression , 1 26-8 ; and truth, 1 3 7 , 1 38--9 Little, J . P . , 3 Logos , 60 Lord's Praver, 93 love, 64-5 , 66-7 , 83, 92, 97, 141-2, 2 1 4,· 222, 223, 278, 290-6 ; and attention, 9 1 -2 , 232, 23 3 , 234; and beauty, 92, 93 ; carnal, 285 , 288, 29 1 ; chaste human, 29 1 , 293-4 ; of creatures, 290, 292, 297 ; disequilibrium in, 1 60 ; friendship, 28 1-9, 294-5 ; and God, 290, 292, 293 , 297 ; Herbert's poem on, 3 5 , 40, 67 ; the ' I ' re-awakened by, 1 0 2 ; implicit, 28 1 ; in the Iliad, 206-8 ; of Phaedrus, 29 1 ; 'Platonic', 294 &n Luxemburg, Rosa, 1 60 Lycee Henri Quatre, 9-1 0 McCarthy, Mary, 62-3 Machiavelli, Niccole, 3 2 machinery, individualizing, 1 78 Marcel, Gabriel, 6 Marcus Aurelius, 1 62, 282 Maritain, Jacques, 1 38--9 Marseille, Simone Weil's stay in, 38--9 , 4 1 , 6 1 , 1 82 Marx, Karl, 1 5 5 , 1 5 7 , 1 63 , 267, 274 ; analysis of oppression, 308 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY 1 49-50, 1 5 3 Marxism, 1 8 , 62, 1 44 , 1 5 1 , 1 63-4, 26 1 , 268 ; Simone Weil's course at Saint-Etienne on, 1 47 material possessions, renouncing, 277-8 mathematics, 1 3-14, 35 means for ends, substitution of, 60, 1 6 1-2, 1 63 Merleau-Ponty, Maurice, 9 metaphysical poets, 35 metaxu , 30 method in creation, 59-60 miners of St Etienne, 6, 1 4 Moliere, Jean-Baptiste Poquelin, 2 1 4 ; L'Ecole des femmes , 92, 2 1 4, 285 , 288 money, 58, 25 1 ; acquisition of, 267 ; boredom associated with, 1 3 1 -2 ; and oppression, 1 5 6--7 ; and property, 1 36--7 monopolies, 250 monotony, 1 79 Montesquieu, Charles-Louis, Baron de, 59 Monteverdi, Claudio, 32 Morocco, 30, 238, 244 music, 5 6 ; Simone Weil's taste in, 3 1-2 mystical contemplation , 59 mysticism, 40 ; demythologizing, 5 1 ; of work, 1 78-81 nation (s) , 242; antagonism between , 243-4 ; concept of, 30, 245, 254 National Council of the Resistance , 57 national defence, 247 national interest, 244--5 , 255--6 national prestige, 244 national security, 244--5 nationalism, 243 natural human environments, 229-3 0 natural right, notion of, 8 1 , 82 nature, man's relations with, 1 5 1 , 1 54--5 , 1 57-8 , 1 62, 163 , 1 72--6 , 1 78 Ne Recomment;ons pas Ia guen-e de Troie , 239n The Needfor Roots , 3, 46, 57-8, 6 1 , 1 05--6 ; Eliot's introduction to, 6, 1 06 'The Needs of the Soul', 1 05-40, 224, 225, 227 ; collective property, 1 36--7 ; equality, 1 1 82 1 ; freedom of opinion, 1 24--3 4 ; hierarchism, 1 2 1 ; honour, 1 2 1-2; liberty, 1 1 5-1 6 ; obedience, 1 1 6-- 1 7 ; order, 1 1 2-1 5 ; private property, 1 35--6 ; punishment, 1 22-4 ; responsibility, 1 1 7-1 8 ; risk, 1 34--5 ; security, 1 3 4 ; truth , 1 37-40 non-being, 90-1 Notebooks (Cahiers ) , 3, 6, 35, 43, 5 1 , 28 1 nothingness, 56, 1 00, 1 8 7 , 263n, 278 Nouveaux Cahiers , 239n Novis, Emile (anagram of Simone Weil's name), 62, 1 82 nursing squad, Simone's project for front-line, 3 8-9, 42, 45--6 obedience, 82, 1 45 , 1 5 5 , 1 5 7 , 1 5 8 ; the need for, 1 1 6--1 7 obligations, 86, 1 06-- 1 1 ; eternal, 1 08-9, 125--6; and human needs, 1 09-1 0 , 224--5 , 227 ; owed towards a collectivity, 1 1 0-1 2 ; and order, 1 1 3 ; and rights, 1 06--7 ; statement of, 221-30 Odyssey ( Homer), 2 1 1 Old Testament, 2 1 3 oligarchies, economic, 24 1 , 250 opinion, 95 ; freedom of, 1 24--3 4 ; and language, 88, 89 opposites, 259--63, 274 ; the aberration of, 26 1 ; and contradictories, 259, 26 1 ; the union of, 26 1 -2 oppression, 1 22, 2 1 9 , 25 1 , 254 ; analysis of, 6 1-2, 1 47-77 ; o f the function, 1 5 ; and union of opposites, 26 1-2 Oppression and Liberty , 3 , 1 77 order, 242, 249, 252, 274; the need for, 1 1 2-15 oscillation of alternating motion, 271-2 INDEX Otway, Thomas, Venice Preserv 'd, 36 pacifism, 1 0 , 239n Paris, German occupation of ( 1 940) , 37-8 Pater, Greek text of the, 40--1 patriotism, 58-9 , 1 46 perfection : imaginery, 260 ; impersonality of, 7 5 ; words expressing, 96-7, 98 Perrin, Father, 39, 41-3, 49, 5 1 , 281 person (personne ) , 70 &n, 74; applied to God , 97-8 ; and notion of rights, 84 ; subordination to the collectivity of, 63-4, 7 5-9, 97 ; see also human personality Personalism, 70, 79 La Pesenteur et Ia Grace see Gravity and Grace Petrement, Simone, 2, 3 , 6 1-2, 65--6 Pharisees, 1 0 3 , 1 44, 1 45 physical labour, 6 1 , 79-80, 1 06 Philip, Andre, 44-5 Plato, 3 7 , 4 1 , 5 8 , 59, 8 1 , 87, 1 68 , 1 7 8 , 1 9 5 , 284, 29 1 , 292; The Great Beast of, 1 4 1 n , 1 44 ; Politics , 59 poetry, 1 80, 1 8 1 , 234; people's need for, 268, 272, 274, 276 Poincare, Raymond, 24 1 , 248 political parties (party system) , 57, 1 30, 1 3 3 ; and freedom of expression, 29-30, 73-4; prohibition of, 1 29, 1 32 Popular Front, 3 0 Portugal, Simone Weil's visit to, 28-9, 3 5 Pasternak, Jean, 3 1 -4 power : as a means, 60, 1 6 1-2; the nature of, 255-7 ; and oppression, 1 57-7 1 , 1 73-4, 1 7 6 ; of the social element, 1 44 ; stability o f , 1 5 8-9 prayer, and attention, 232, 234, 270, 273 'Prerequisite to D ignity of Labour', 264-76 press/newspapers : and freedom of 309 expression, 1 26, 1 28 ; and truth, 138, 1 39 Price, Hugh, 6 primitive economies/society , and oppression, 1 5 3-5 , 1 72-3 , 1 74, 175, 1 76 private property, 1 3 5--6 privilege, 84-5 , 249 , 258 ; and oppression, 1 56-7, 1 63 , 1 7 1 production, productive forces, 1 60, 25 1 ; and class struggle , 253-4; higher stages of, 1 54-5 , 1 7 4-7 ; and oppression, 1 5 , 1 48 , 1 49-50, 1 5 3-5 , 1 6 3 , 1 73 ; and power, 1 60, 163-4, 1 6 5 , 1 66, 1 67 ; primitive forms of, 1 5 3-5 , 1 72-3 profession of faith, 22 1-7 propaganda, 59, 7 3 , 95 , 1 27 , 1 39, 275 property, 242; private, 1 35--6 ; Roman definition of, 82 proportion, 242; and social equilibriu m, 1 1 9-20 providential accidents, 1 66-7 publications : and freedom of expression, 1 25-8 ; and truth, 1 3 7-9 punishment, 94-5 , 1 1 6, 1 1 9, 1 44 ; capital, 95 ; disciplinary, 1 22 ; the need for, 1 22-4 ; penal, 1 22-4 purity, notion of, 237, 293 purpose, in workers' universe, 267, 268-9 Pythagoreans, 3 7 , 195 , 286 quasi-hell on earth, 1 0 1 Racine, Jean, 286 ; Phedre , 87, 9 2 , 1 0 3 , 2 1 4 , 285 , 288 radio broadcasts, 1 28 , 1 39 reality: beyond the world, 221 -4 , 225, 279 ; a n d love, 292 ; of this world, 222, 223 , 224, 278-9 Rees, Richard, 3 , 49, 65 Reflections concerning the Causes of Liberty and Social Oppression , 6 1 -2, 1 47-77 'Reflections on the Quantum Theory' , 41 310 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY ' Reflections on the Rebellion', 56--7 reforms, reformism, 1 5 3 , 25 1 relationship, notion of, 1 42, 1 75, 242; economic, 25 1-2 the relative, notion of, 1 42 Renault factory, Bou1ogne­ Billancourt, Simone Weil's job in, 24--8 , 264 Resistance, French, 38, 183 respect, 1 09, 1 1 0, 223, 224 ; and equality, 1 1 8 ; and honour, 1 2 1 , 1 22 ; for the human personality, 7 1 , 77 , 78 ; owed to human collectivities , 1 1 0- 1 1 responsibility, the need for, 1 1 7- 1 8 retribution, 1 95 revenge, 2 1 7 , 2 1 8 revolution, 1 5 3 , 1 7 1 , 25 1 , 266--7 , 268 La Revolution Proleta�ienne (review ) , 1 1 Reynaud-Guerithault, 12-1 3 , 16 rights, notion of, 57, 7 1 , 72, 80--4, 86, 93, 1 06 ; and obligations, 1 06--7 , 221 ; personal, 84 ; positive, 1 08 risk, the need for, 1 34--5 , 229 Roanne, Simone Wei! teaches philosophy in, 1 2- 1 3 , 1 6 , 1 7 Romains, Jules, 255 Romans, ancient, 3 5 , 1 43 , 1 44, 1 59, 1 67 , 1 69, 1 70-1 , 2 1 3-14, 250 ; and notion of rights, 81-2 roots see The Need for Roots Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, 59, 8 1 ; Le Contrat Social, 1 29 Russell, Bertram, Problems of Philosophy , 6 Russia (Soviet Union ) , 267 ; communism in, 1 5 , 16, 245 , 268 Russian Revolution, 1 7 1 , 1 77 the sacred in man, 70-2, 74, 75 , 76, 78, 224; and the collectivity, 76 sacrifice, 1 1 1 , 1 5 8 , 1 6 1 , 240 Saint-Etienne : general strikes in ( 1 932) , 1 7 ; Simone Weil's involvement with workers of, 6, 1 1 , 16, 19, 1 47 St Francis of Assisi, 83 St John of the Cross, 59 Saint Quentin, Simone Wei! teaches philosophy and Greek in, 34 'salaries', notion of, 54 Sartre, Jean-Paul, 9, 1 05 Schumann, Maurice, 43-5 science(s) , 3 5 , 74, 75 , 77, 79, 1 4 1 , 1 78 , 242 ; individualizing, 1 79 ; and intuitive attention , 273 ; post- 1 6th century conception of, 60-1 ; the sacred in, 75 ; teaching of, 1 3- 1 4 Science, Necessity a n d the Love of God, 3 security, 242 ; the need for, 1 34 the self, 77, 99-1 04, 278 sensibility, and the desire for good , 224 servility, 62, 1 7 3 , 26 1 servitude, 62, 1 5 5 , 1 62, 1 7 3 , 1 77 Shakespeare, William, 2 1 4 ; Histories, 1 6 1 ; King Lear, 1 , 87, 92 sin, notion of, 236, 237, 26 1 , 278 slaves, slavery, 24, 26--7 , 72, 1 0 1 , 1 34, 1 3 8-9 , 1 58, 1 63 , 1 67 , 1 6 8 , 1 72, 173 , 177, 1 7 8 , 1 80-1 , 1 8990, 202, 2 1 8 , 26 1 , 265-6, 282 ; mechanical, 1 63 slogans, political and economic, 250-1 , 254, 255 social communication and exchange, 53-6 social organization, 1 7 ; and oppression, 1 5 1-2, 1 5 3-5 , 1 6 5 , 1 72-3 , 1 74--5 , 1 76 social prestige, 84, 25 5 , 257 social reprobation, 1 44--5 Socrates, 1 95 solar energy, and chlorophyll, 27 1 Solesme Benedictine monastery, Simone Weil's stay at, 34--5 solitude, 76, 236, 277, 295 'Some Reflections on the Origins of Hitlerism', 3 5 , 1 82 Sophocles, 87 , 92, 2 1 1 ; Antigone, 30; Electra , 30 the soul : alienation of, 270 ; and INDEX attention, 9 1-2, 232, 234; delivery from evil, 93-4 ; and destiny, 2 1 2- 1 4 ; and force , 1 8 5 , 20 1 , 202, 205 , 206 ; and love, 294 ; the needs of the, 1 05-40, 224, 225 , 227--8 ; opposite virtues in, 262; and workers' bargaining, 80 Spanish Civil War, 3 1 , 23 8 , 247--8 &n, 256 Spinoza, Baruch, 1 48 , 1 73 spirituality of work, 1 79--80 Stalin, Josef, 1 6 the State, 30, 1 5 5 , 245 ; economic control by, 244, 250 ; and national interests, 243-4, 254, 255-6 State Reform Commission, 22 1 strikes, 1 7 , 254 studies and faith, 234-5 subjection, 62, 1 6 1 , 2 1 1 suffering, 186--7, 202, 2 1 2 , 2 1 4 , 2 1 6 , 2 1 7 , 2 1 8 , 2 1 9 , 274, 275, 279, 28 1 , 282 ; and affliction, 90, 9 1 ; redemptive, 1 00 ; and union of opposites, 262 suicide, 49 , 280 superstition, 242 Supreme Council of the Rebellion, Simone Weil's plan for, 57 'Sur les Responsabilites de Ia Litterature', 38 surplus production, 1 65 Surrealism, 77, 1 27 , 238 survival, 1 00-- 1 syndicalist groups, 1 1 , 1 6 , 1 47 taylorized (conveyor belt) labour, 264, 276 teaching (schoolwork) : aim of, 234-5 , 273 ; Simone Weil's methods of, 1 2- 1 4 Thevenon, Albertine, 1 9 , 264; Simone Weil's letters to , 1 9-22, 24-8 Thevenon, Urbain , 1 9 Thibon, Gustav, 6, 1 2 , 39-4 1 , 43, 49, 263n 'Towards the Proletarian Revolution', 1 5 Thucydides, 2 1 0 31 1 Trade Union Congress, Rheims, 1 6 trade unions, 1 0 , 1 6 , 1 30 , 1 3 1 , 1 32 tragedy of Lear, 1 -2 trains of events, man's relations with, 1 7- 1 8 Trojan War, 62-3 , 1 82-2 1 5 , 240--1 , 245 , 246, 249, 254, 25 6, 298 Trotsky, Leon, 1 5 , 20, 163 truth, 2, 7 , 8 , 5 5 , 84, 86, 87 , 90, 9 1 , 95, 97, 98, 23 1 , 233, 234 ; and affliction, 87, 8 8 , 92 ; and beauty, 92-3 ; contradiction in, 259 ; impersonality of, 75 ; in laws of mechanics, 27 1 -2 ; and love, 9 1-2; the need for, 1 37 unemployed, lack of responsibility for, 1 1 7 United States, 267, 268 ; Simone Wei! in ( 1 942) , 43-5 Upanishads, 35, 292 ; Simone Weil's translation of extracts from, 46 ' Uprootedness and Nationhood', 1 05 uprooting, 36, 57-8 , 1 0 1 , 230 Velasquez, Diego, 2 Venise Sauvee , 36 Vercingetorix, 1 22 Vichy France, 37, 1 32 Video meliora , 235-6 ' La vie et Ia greve des ouvrieres metallos', 264 Villon, Franc;ois, 92, 2 1 4 violence, 1 1 4, 1 9 3 , 199, 20 1 , 266 Virgil, 87 ; Aeneid, 2 1 1 virtues : natural, 26 1 ; opposite, 260, 262 'Void and Compensation', 2 1 6--20, 266 vulnerability, 298 wages and salaries, 80, 1 30 , 1 3 1 -2 Waiting on God, 3 , 289n Walter, Bruno, 3 1 war, 64, 72; and the national interest, 244-5 , 255-6 ; the necessity for, 200--2 ; and opposing ideologies, 245--8, 254, 256 ; and the power of words, 241-5 8 ; Second World War, 37-49, 56--7, 69-70, 76, 127, 147, 182-3 ; Spanish Civil War, 3 1 , 312 SIMONE WElL - AN ANTHOLOGY 238, 247-8 ; Trojan (the Iliad) , 62-3 , 182-2 1 5 , 240-1 ; with no definable objective, 238 , 239-41 wealth, acquisition of, 267 Wei!, Andre (brother) , 7, 38, 45 , 48 , 1 8 3 Wei!, Selma (mother) , 2, 7 1 8 1 , 264-6 ; the mysticism of, 1 78-8 1 ; spirituality of, 1 79-8 0 ; see also labour workers, working-class , 1 7 , 1 8 , 1 9 , 8 0 , 1 30-2, 1 5 6 , 1 7 9 ; associations, 1 30, 1 32-4 ; class struggle, 2.50, 253-4 ; control of Wilde, Oscar, 77 production by , 1 8 ; Greek the will, and attention, 23 1-7 literature published for, 29-3 0 ; will-to-power, notion of, 250 Winch, Peter, 6 Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 6 women's peace camps, 63 and political parties, 1 30, 1 3 1 ; and religion, 268-74 ; revolution, 266-7 , 268 ; Simone Weil's factory jobs, 1 9-29 ; trade unions, 1 3 0-1 , 1 3 2 ; wages, 80, 1 30, 1 3 1 , 1 3 2 wretchedness, human, 236, 290 words, 295 ; and affliction, 86-7 ; the power of, 96-7 , 238-58 work : defined, 1 0 ; disgust for, 1 79, 265 ; manual, 1 79 , 1 80, PENGUIN (/tt---- ­ \Y) ONLINE read about your favourite authors • investigate over 1 2 , 000 titles • browse our online magazine • enter one of our literary quizzes • win some fantastic prizes in our competitions • e - mail us with your comments and book reviews • instantly order any Penguin book 'To be recommended without reservation . . . a rich and rewarding online experience' Internet Magazine www. pe ng u i n .com PE N G U I N � C L A S S I C S \� ------- ------- w w w. p c n g u i n cl a s s i cs . com • D e ta ils a b o u t every P e nguin Class i c • A dv a n c e d info r m a ti o n a b o u t fo rth c o m i ng titles • Hun dreds of a u th o r b iogra p h ies • FR E E res o u rces i n c lu ding critica l essays o n the b o o k s a n d their h is t o ri cal b a ckgrou n d, reade r 's a n d tea c h e r 's guides. • L i n k s to o th e r web res o u rces fo r t h e Class ics • D is c u s s i o n a rea • O n line review copy o rdering fo r a ca demics • C o m p e titions with p rizes, a n d c h a lle nging Class ics trivia q u izzes p I 1\1 C Ll I 1\ C I .\ S S I C S 0 '\ I I 1\1 I' READ MORE IN PENGUIN I n every corner of the world, o n every subject under the sun, Penguin represents quality and variety - the very best in publishing today. For complete information about books available from Penguin - including Puffins, Penguin Classics and Arkana - and how to order them, write to us at the appropriate address below. Please note that for copyright reasons the selection of books varies from country to country. In the United Kingdom: Please write to Dept. EP, Penguin Books Ltd, Bath Road, Harmondsworth. West Drayton, Middlesex UB7 ODA In the United States: Please write to Consumer Serrices, Penguin Putnam Inc. , 405 Murray Hill Parkway, East Ruthe1[ord, New Jersey 07073-2136. VISA and M asterCard holders call l -800-63 1 -857 1 to order Penguin titles In Canada: Please write to Penguin Books Canada Ltd, 10 Alcorn A venue, Suite 300, Toronto, Ontario M4 V 3B2 In Australia: Please write to Penguin Books A ustralia Ltd, 487 Maroondah Highway, Ringwood, Victoria 3134 In New Zealand: Please write to Penguin Books ( NZ) Ltd, Prirate Bag 1 02902, North Shore Mail Centre, Auckland 10 In India: Please write to Penguin Books India Pvt Ltd, 1 1 Community Centre, Panchshee/ Park, New Delhi 110017 In the Netherlands: Please write to Penguin Books Netherlands b1•, Postbus 3507, NL-1001 AH Amsterdam In Germany: Please write to Penguin Books Deutschland GmbH, Metz/erstrasse 26, 60594 Frankfurt am Main In Spain: Please write to Penguin Books S. A . , Bravo Murillo 1 9, J "B, 28015 Madrid In Italy: Please write to Penguin Ita/ia s.r./., Via Vittorio Emanuele 45/a, 20094 Corsica, Milano In France: Please write to Penguin France, 12, Rue Prosper Ferradou, 31 700 Blagnac In Japan: Please write to Penguin Books Japan Ltd, lidabashi KM-Bidg, 2-23-9 Koraku, Bunkyo-Ku, Tokyo 112-0004 In South Africa: Please write to Penguin Books South Africa (Pry) Ltd, P. 0. Box 751093, Garden view, 2047 Johannesburg
